Mental Health, Religion & Culture
ISSN: 1367-4676 (Print) 1469-9737 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/cmhr20
Re-expanding the phenomenology of
hallucinations: lessons from sixteenth-century
Spain
Simon R. Jones
To cite this article: Simon R. Jones (2010) Re-expanding the phenomenology of hallucinations:
lessons from sixteenth-century Spain, Mental Health, Religion & Culture, 13:2, 187-208, DOI:
10.1080/13674670903295093
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13674670903295093
Published online: 16 Feb 2010.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 244
View related articles 
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=cmhr20

Mental Health, Religion & Culture
Vol. 13, No. 2, March 2010, 187-208
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Re-expanding the phenomenology of hallucinations: lessons from
sixteenth-century Spain
Simon R. Jones*
Department of Psychology, Durham University, Durham, United Kingdom
(Received 24 June 2009; final version received 28 August 2009)
The paradigm within which hallucinations are studied, and the explanatory
frameworks employed, may bias the phenomenological analysis of these
experiences. After introducing the new term, hallucination, this paper undertook
an inter-disciplinary study of the phenomenology of hallucinations identified by
the sixteenth-century theologians, St John of the Cross and St Teresa of Avila. It
was examined whether the phenomenological properties they highlighted are
identified and addressed by contemporary psychological research. Many of these
properties were indeed found to be acknowledged and studied by contemporary
research in psychiatric patients, as well as in healthy individuals during
hypnagogia, near-death experiences and at times of stress. However, many
experiences, such as ''internal voices,'' ''soundless voices,'' and ''voices that save,''
were found to be neglected by contemporary research, as was the potential
for hallucinations to communicate novel/original information. Finally, it was
examined how these phenomenological insights may be ''front-loaded'' into
future experimental designs.
Keywords: Derrida; hallucinations; hearing voices; phenomenology; schizophre-
nia; St John of the Cross; St Teresa of Avila
Introduction
In contemporary scientific-medical parlance, those who undergo percept-like experiences
in the absence of external stimuli (PLEAS) are defined as having hallucinations (e.g.
David, 2004; Slade & Bentall, 1988). Although the majority of the population will have at
least a fleeting personal experience of a hallucination during their lifetime, most probably
when on the borders of sleep (Jones, Fernyhough, & Meads, 2009; Ohayon, 2000), the
proportion who regularly have such experiences in clear consciousness is thought to be
only around 1-2% (Aleman & Larøi, 2008; Romme & Escher, 1993). One key property of
hallucinations, inherent to their definition, is their ''private experiential quality'' (Larøi, de
Hann, Jones, & Raballo, submitted). This, combined with their relative rarity, means
researchers are unlikely to have a priori knowledge of the phenomenology of
hallucinations. As such, there have been a number of phenomenological surveys of
hallucinations that try to characterise the experience (e.g. Leudar, Thomas, McNally,
& Glinski, 1997; Nayani & David, 1996; Stephane, Thuras, Nasrallah, & Georgopoulos,
2003). However, these studies employ methodologies which question participants about
*Email: drsijones@hotmail.com
ISSN 1367-4676 print/ISSN 1469-9737 online
 2010 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/13674670903295093
http://www.informaworld.com

the dimensions of the experience that researchers have predetermined as being important.
For example, Stephane et al. (2003) identified 20 dimensions of auditory hallucinations
based on ''the literature and clinical experience of the authors'' (p. 187). Similarly, Leudar
et al. (1997) performed interviews with voice-hearers to ''find out whether the interviewee's
verbal hallucinations did or did not have the properties'' (p. 888) which the researchers
were interested in. Such approaches run the risk of contemporary conceptions of what a
hallucination is like, significantly influencing what we discover about the phenomenology
of such experiences.
There are a number of sources of evidence that this may be the case. First, Leudar and
Thomas (2000) provide an example of this occurring in the work of the French
psychiatrist, Pierre Janet. Janet disbelieved certain aspects of what his patients told him
about the phenomenology of their hallucinations because they were not consistent with the
model of hallucinations he held. If such phenomenological blindness occurred in the past,
it is likely still happening today. Specifically, the lens through which we view hallucinatory
experiences
may
be
biased
by
our
current
explanatory
frameworks.
Studies
of
hallucinations within the dominant bio-medical paradigm often conceptualise such
experiences as the random outpouring of a diseased brain (Sperling, Bleich, Maiho¨ fner,
& Reulbach, 2009), or a ''symptom of brain disease'' (Stephane et al., 2003, p. 186). This
approach may cause researchers to overlook phenomenological properties of hallucina-
tions not consistent with this paradigm, such as their potential to impart meaningful, novel
and original information. Thus, the dominant bio-medical paradigm may at best bias
researchers' attention to phenomenological properties of hallucinations that are in
accordance with the paradigm, or at worst blind researchers to potentially important
phenomenological properties inconsistent with the paradigm.
A second line of evidence that our conception of what a hallucination is, affects our
understanding of their phenomenology comes from attempts to retrospectively apply this
term to ''experiences redolent of hallucinations'' (Berrios, 1996, p. 35) reported by
historical figures such as Socrates and Joan of Arc (Leudar & Thomas, 2000). Leduar and
Thomas argue that such an approach ends up discovering ''substantial differences between
the phenomenon we initially categorised as being the same'' (p. 208). One implication of
this is that, phenomenologically, there may be important differences between our concept
of ''hallucination,'' and experiences with a family resemblance (Wittgenstein, 1953) to
them that occurred in the past.
When examining experiences from the past which appear redolent of our contemporary
concept of ''hallucination,'' but which have not previously been identified in these terms,
it is tempting to simply label these experiences as hallucinations. Such an approach is
fraught with problems, with two in particular being of note. The first emerges from an
examination of the aetiology of our contemporary concept of ''hallucination,'' which
shows the term to be pejorative. The second arises from an examination of the
ontological assumptions underlying the conception of ''hallucination,'' which shows the
experience to always be context-contingent (Leudar & Thomas, 2000). These problems will
be treated in turn.
The term hallucination, as noted above, has been defined as referring to PLEAS.
However, Sarbin and Juhasz (1967) argue that the term ''hallucination'' only actually
refers to a subset of PLEAS, namely those which are negatively valued. The promotion
and first widespread use of the term ''hallucination'' occurred in the context of the
eighteenth-century medicalisation of such experiences (Berrios, 1996). During this time,
medicine, for the first time, claimed authority over experiences that had traditionally fallen
under the authority of the church (James, 1995). The content of ''hallucinations'' was
188
S.R. Jones

understood as being meaningless, and their presence were understood as a symptom of
mental disorder (see Jones & Fernyhough, 2008, for alternative conceptions). Sarbin and
Juhasz (1967) argue that the term ''hallucination'' was the medical successor of earlier
theological terms used to describe negatively valued PLEAS (e.g. ''corporeal visions''), and
that the term ''hallucination'' is hence inherently pejorative.
In contrast, another subset of PLEAS has been positively valued throughout history,
being understood as meaningful religious, mystical or spiritual experiences, with their
content ''semantically pregnant'' (Berrios, 1996, p. 35), and their presence a sign of divine
grace. The recognition of this problem by service-user organisations and some academics
has led to the hegemony of the term ''hallucination'' being challenged. More neutral terms
have been introduced, such as ''hearing-voices'' (Romme & Escher, 1993), as well as terms
specifically for PLEAS that are positively valued, such as ''spiritual experiences'' (e.g.
Clarke, 2001). Examinations of the factors that contribute to whether specific PLEAS are
understood as pathological or spiritual (e.g. Bhugra, 1996; Kroll & Bachrach, 1982) have
led to the conclusion that such a decision rests on the way PLEAS ''are embedded in the
structure of values and beliefs of the person concerned'' (Jackson & Fulford, 1997, p. 41).
It is hence inappropriate to refer to all PLEAS as hallucinations, ignoring of the value
placed on the experience and the historical, cultural and temporal context they are
embedded in.
If one accepts the argument above, namely that it is incorrect to use the term
''hallucination'' to refer to historically situated experiences redolent of hallucinations
today, this still leaves open the assumption that an alternative term could be created. This
would be a search to unite all ''hallucinations'' in one single term, a search, in Tolkein's
(1968) terminology, for one term to rule them all. The discussion above implicitly suggests
that the term ''PLEAS'' might be such a term. However, any such term would effectively
claim to refer to an entity with an objective ontological existence, being ''out there,
independently of the psychiatric discourses and practices that attempt to define and to
treat it'' (Borch-Jacobsen, 2001, p. 20). Such a term would also necessitate ''a basic, raw
experience [of hallucinations] . . . which is given different clothes in different historical
periods'' (p. 208). Leudar and Thomas have argued strongly against this, proposing that
the specific ''hallucinatory'' experiences people have are determined by the local concepts
at the time, and that it is impossible to distill off the context-contingent aspects of the
experience. This raises the problem as to how to use language to refer to a historical
experience which has parallels with experiences reported today, yet without implying that a
single ontologically equivalent object is being referred to. One solution is to employ
''parallel vocabularies,'' using terms such as ''auditory hallucination'' or ''locution''
depending on the context (Kroll & Bachrach, 2005, p. 8). However, this proves somewhat
cumbersome, and may actually fail to communicate to the modern reader what the
historical experience was likely to have involved.
Thus, although it was argued above that use of term ''hallucination'' was inappropriate
when referring to historical experiences redolent of them, the term is in some ways
necessary to communicate to the contemporary reader some understanding of what the
key features of the experience were likely to be. To address this inappropriate-
yet-necessary dilemma surrounding the term ''hallucination,'' the present paper will
employ the strategy utilised by Derrida (1998) when a word was necessary, yet inaccurate,
namely placing it sous rature (under erasure). This involves crossing out the word when
written, since it is inaccurate, yet allowing it to remain legible, since it is still necessary
(Derrida, 1998). Thus, instead of inaccurately referring to individuals who are temporally
and culturally distant from us as experiencing ''hallucinations,'' I will refer to them instead
Mental Health, Religion & Culture
189

as experiencing hallucinations. Furthermore, because, as was noted above, many
individuals today also dispute the hegemony of the term ''hallucination,'' I will also use
the term hallucination to refer to such experiences as well.
Returning to the problem in hand, namely that contemporary conceptions and models
of hallucinations may affect our knowledge of their phenomenology, this paper aims to
analyze a description of the phenomenology of hallucinations written in a different era,
place and cultural context. This analysis will attempt to determine what facets of
hallucinations were highlighted as important, and examine whether these phenomenolo-
gical characteristics are still identified today, and addressed, by contemporary research.
Such an analysis has the potential to highlight important phenomenology properties of
hallucinations that are not addressed today, and hence to (re)expand the phenomenology of
hallucinations. Furthermore, Gallagher and Sørensen (2006) have argued that insights from
phenomenological analyses of phenomena have important consequences for their sub-
sequent experimental study. Specifically, they argue that phenomenological analyses allow
subsequent experimental work to undertake the ''front-loading [of] phenomenological
insights into experimental design'' (p. 123).The implications of the analyses undertaken in
this paper for the experimental design of hallucination research will also be examined.
It may be objected that insights into the phenomenology of hallucinations could be
achieved more simply by qualitative studies of first-person accounts. This is, of course, an
exceedingly important and still under-utilised methodology. However, contemporary
individuals' reports of their experiences are still likely to be limited by contemporary
conceptions of what the important dimensions of the experience are. Furthermore, the
conceptual vocabulary may not be available to allow certain aspects of the experience to be
communicated. By studying historical descriptions of hallucinations it is possible, to some
degree, to step out of the current paradigm and to examine the phenomenology of
hallucinations through a different set of eyes, and potentially (re-)discover a vocabulary
for certain facets of the experience. The two sets of eyes to be utilised in this paper are now
long returned to their maker, having originally belonged to two sixteenth-century Spanish
theologians.
St Teresa of Avila (1515-1582) and St John of the Cross (1542-1591)
Whilst many leading theologians have written extensively on the experience of
hallucinations, this paper will focus on the writings of St Teresa of Avila and St John
of the Cross. These authors' contributions to Catholic theology led them both to receive
the title of ''Doctor of the Church,'' an honour only extended to 31 others including giants
of the Church such as St Augustine, St Jerome and St Thomas Aquinas. Both St Teresa
and St John were members of the Order of Our Lady of Mount Carmel, founded in the
twelfth century on Mount Carmel, a site long regarded as a sanctuary, and where
Pythagoras is reputed to have meditated (Brenan, 1975). This Order is characterised by
prayer, silence, meditation and contemplation. By undertaking such practices St Teresa
and St John can be argued, like the early Desert Hermits, to have taken a highly
experimental approach to the interior life (Maitland, 2008). For the Desert Hermits,
''silence emerged as an effective instrument for inducing profound experiences'' (Maitland,
2008, p. 203), and this appears to have been the case for St Teresa and St John too.
St Teresa was born in Spain in 1515, entering the Carmelite convent of the Incarnation
at Avila aged 20 (Zimmerman, 1912). Her health soon deteriorated and she suffered a long
period of illness, during which she began the intense practice of mental prayer
190
S.R. Jones

(Zimmerman, 1912). This involved withdrawal from external stimuli, entrance into
contemplative meditation, and resultant visions, locutions, trances, raptures and a ''state
of union'' with God (Brenan, 1975). St Teresa undertook a sweeping reform of the
Carmelite Order with her resultant ''Discalced Carmelite'' Order characterised by a
heightened emphasis on silence and prayer (Maitland, 2008). In 1567 she travelled to
Medina to find a community of nuns who would undertake the Carmelite life according to
the new contemplative style that she had developed in Avila, and to extend this mode of
life to men (Kavanaugh & Rodriguez, 1991). It was here, aged 52, that she first met the
25-year-old man whom she would come to refer to as her ''little Seneca'' (Peers, 1943,
p. 94), and who is known in the world today as St John of the Cross.
Juan de Yepes had been born into a poor family in Spain in 1542 (Zimmerman, 1910).
Aged 21, after a Jesuit and university education, he joined the Carmelite Order, attracted
by its contemplative approach (Kavanaugh & Rodriguez, 1991). Whilst still a youth,
words allegedly came to him which seemed to be spoken by God, saying ''Thou shalt serve
me, in an Order whose former perfection thou shalt help to restore'' (Peers, 1943, p. 15).
Upon meeting St Teresa he decided to join her Discalced Carmelite Order. In 1577, after
receiving conflicting orders from competing jurisdictions, he was arrested, and imprisoned
in solitary confinement in a dark, cramped Toledo cell, measuring only 6 by 10 feet
(Kavanaugh & Rodriguez, 1991). He remained there for nine months, living off bread and
water, and being lived on by lice (Kavanaugh & Rodriguez, 1991). It was here that he
began composing some of the great poems of Spanish literature (Zimmerman, 1910). After
managing to escape from his cell in the style of Errol Flynn, complete with a rope made
from strips of bedsheets (Peers, 1943), he spent the rest of his life writing, guiding, praying
and directing the spiritual development of others across Spain (Kavanaugh & Rodriguez,
1991). St John particularly identified with individuals in the Bible, such as Moses, David,
Jeremiah, Paul, and John, due to the concrete personal experiences they reported
(Kavanaugh & Rodriguez, 1991). Given this, it is unsurprising that, starting from his and
St Teresa's own experiences, he embarked on a programme of empirical mysticism,
exploring this realm in a theological context (Zimmerman, 1910). Indeed, it has been
argued that ''nothing but his own deep and varied experience could have made him what
he may well be termed - the greatest psychologist in the history of mysticism'' (St John of
the Cross, 1943, p. xl). He died in 1591.
It has been written that no person knows what to do with the divine when it falls into
their hands (Farrer, 1966, as cited in Herrera, 2004). Fortunately for us, St John decided to
write about it. In Book II of The Ascent of Mount Carmel (St John of the Cross, 1943), he
presents a systematic analysis of hallucinations, which he termed ''supernatural
communications'' (p. 140). Peers has correctly noted that no fields of study are as ''apt
to become vague and obscure as has that of mystical theology'' (St John of the Cross,
1943, p. xxxix), yet St John's writings on this topic are unusually clear. He presents an
exceedingly systematic and logical analysis of hallucinations. Due to this, the present paper
will focus on his systemisation of such experiences, rather than St Teresa's less formalised
approach.
Before examining St John's systematic analysis of hallucinations, a caveat must be
made. I have argued that an analysis of the writings of St John and St Teresa can allow us
to step outside of the contemporary bio-medical paradigm to reveal an alternative
phenomenological analysis of hallucinations. However, this is certainly not to claim that
the accounts given by these sixteenth-century Spanish theologians are in any way ''better''
or ''truer'' phenomenological descriptions. Just as the bio-medical paradigm biases
contemporary approaches to the study of hallucinations, so St John's and St Teresa's
Mental Health, Religion & Culture
191

approaches to hallucinations were biased by the then dominant Christian religious-
mystical paradigm. This paradigm prescribed certain features of hallucinations as
important and noteworthy, and others as less relevant. On a purely practical level, if
St John, St Teresa or their followers, were to claim holiness and authenticity, then
the words and phrases they employed to describe hallucinations had to conform to the
prevailing paradigm. The presence of the Inquisition in Spain at this time made the
dangers of being perceived as being misguided or heretical, very salient. Furthermore,
naturalistic accounts of hallucinations put forward in the fourteenth and fifteenth century
by theologians such as Oresme, Langenstein and Gerson had raised questions about the
validity of hallucinations arising from contemplative states (Fogleman, 2009). For
example, Langenstein argued that excessive contemplation was likely to harm the body's
sensory faculties leading to physically- or bodily induced false visions, which were hateful
to God (Fogleman, 2009). In evaluating the value of hallucinations achieved through
contemplation it was the character of the person having the experience that was claimed to
be important. For example, Oresme described truly divine visions as coming to ''men of
sober and peaceful life, whose souls are like clear and shining mirrors, clean from worldly
thoughts'' (Fogleman, 2009, p. 17). Although the lifestyles, religious positions and
characters of St John and St Teresa gave their experiences and writings credibility, the
content and form of their experiences still needed to be in line with the prevailing paradigm
to be acceptable.
Given St John of the Cross' Jesuit education he would have been strongly influenced by
authoritative figures such as St Augustine, St Paul and St Ignatius of Loyola. The writings
of these saints do indeed shape the manner in which St John approached hallucinations.
In particular, St John's classifications necessarily operated within St Augustine's tripartite
distinction between corporeal, imaginative and intellectual visions. Furthermore, the
traditional ranking of the value of these three types of vision needed to be heeded.
Intellectual visions (basically, those with no perceptual component) were seen as the most
reliably divine type of visions. For example, St Thomas Aquinas, who was pronounced a
Doctor of the Church in 1567 when St John was aged 25, argued that divine truth was
''best understood by contemplation of the truth itself, rather than in addition to the
similitude of corporeal things'' (St Thomas Aquinas, 1920, IIa IIae q. 174 a. 2). Such
externally located ''corporeal'' voices and visions were considered less reliable and more
likely to be associated with the devil. This, to an extent, discouraged the further analysis of
the form and content of these experiences. The proposal that hallucinations should be
''judged by their fruits'' was another factor which potentially shifted attention away from
the phenomenology of hallucinations, and towards their consequences for living.
However, even given these limitations, there is still an abundance of rich phenomen-
ological data in St John's writings on hallucinations that may inform our study of
hallucinations today.
St John on the phenomenology of hallucinations
St John (1943) introduces a number of key dichotomies in Chapter X of Book II of The
Ascent of Mount Carmel. The first is whether information is received through natural or
supernatural channels. Natural channels include information received from external
objects via our bodily senses, and that created by our imagination. Contrastingly, the
supernatural channel is ''all that is given to the understanding over and above its natural
ability and capacity'' (p. 101). It is the supernatural channel which will concern us here.
192
S.R. Jones

St John subdivides knowledge gained from supernatural channels into corporeal and
spiritual knowledge. Corporeal supernatural knowledge may be received by the outward
bodily senses (sight, sound, taste, touch, smell) or by means of the inward bodily senses
(i.e. in imaginative visions, auditions, etc.). Whereas knowledge is received naturally by the
inward bodily senses through effortful, active productions of imagination, supernatural
knowledge received by the inward bodily senses, is passively received, ''without any effort''
(p. 110). This later category, following St Augustine, he terms ''imaginary visions''
(p. 110). Spiritual supernatural knowledge is similarly subdivided into two classes: ''that
which is distinct and special . . . and that which is confused, general and dark'' (p. 101). The
''distinct and special'' may be received by the spirit without the aid of any bodily sense,
in the form of visions, revelations, locutions (hearing voices) and spiritual feelings.
In contrast, ''confused, general and dark'' knowledge ''is of one kind alone, which
is contemplation that is given in faith'' (p. 101). St John's classification system (with
his terminology) is presented in Figure 1. These types of hallucinations will be analysed
in turn.
1. Supernatural ! Corporeal ! Outward bodily senses
In this category, St John (1943) describes how people may see saints, angels or
extraordinary lights, hear words (with or without accompanying visions), smell perfumes,
taste sweetness or experience via touch ''as if all the bones and the marrow rejoice and sing
and are bathed in delight'' (p. 102). St John describes these hallucinations as being very
palpable, material and able to ''stir the senses greatly'' (p. 103).
2. Supernatural ! Corporeal ! Inward bodily senses
These are the same as experienced by the outward bodily senses in that they involve
images, sounds, etc., but differ in that they are (a) ''much more beautiful [vivid] and
perfect'' (St John, 1943, p. 131), (b) ''subtler and produce a deeper impression upon the
soul'' (p. 131) and (c) more spiritual. Furthermore ''beneath these images, God often
represents many things to the soul, and teaches it much wisdom'' (p. 131). St John claims
these types of experiences were undergone by the prophets Daniel, Isaiah and Jeremiah.
3. Supernatural! Spiritual! Distinct & special! Visions! Corporeal
These types of visions, claims St John (1943), are of ''all material things that are in Heaven
and on earth, which the soul is able to see, even while it is still in the body, by the aid of a
certain supernatural illumination, derived from God, wherein it is able to see all things that
are not present, both in Heaven and on earth'' (p. 187). St John argues that it was this class
of experience that was undergone by St John the Divine (Revelations 21:10) when he
described seeing a vision of the celestial Jerusalem in Heaven. Such visions, he claims, are
much ''clearer and subtler'' (p. 190) than those experienced by the bodily senses. In these
visions, ''the soul sees the things that God wills it to see, easily and most clearly, whether
they be of Heaven or of earth, and the absence or presence of them is no hindrance to the
vision. And it is at times as though a door were opened before it into a great brightness,
through which the soul sees a light, after the manner of a lightning flash, which, on a dark
night, reveals things suddenly, and causes them to be clearly and distinctly seen'' (p. 190).
The effect these visions produce is a feeling of ''quiet, illumination, joy like that of glory,
sweetness, purity and love, humility and inclination or elevation of the spirit in God''
(p. 190). St John claims that the devil may also produce such visions but that these are
discernable (see below) from those sent from God as the former ''produce aridity of spirit
as to communion with God and an inclination to esteem oneself highly, and to receive and
Mental Health, Religion & Culture
193

set store by the visions aforesaid, and in no wise do they produce the gentleness of humility
and love of God'' (St John, 1943).
4. Supernatural! Spiritual! Distinct & special! Visions! Incorporeal
These visions of ''incorporeal substances'' (such as angels), cannot be seen by the aid of
the previously mentioned illumination, claims St John (1943), but only by another and a
higher illumination which he calls the ''illumination of glory'' (p. 187). These visions are
''not of this life'' (p. 188) and cannot be seen ''in the mortal body; for, if God were
pleased to communicate them to the soul, in essence as they are, the soul would at once
go forth from the flesh and would be loosed from this mortal life'' (p. 188). As such,
Supernatural 
channel 
Corporeal 
Spiritual 
Outward bodily 
senses 
(Chapter XI) 
Inward bodily 
senses 
"Imaginary visions" 
(Chapter XVI) 
Distinct and 
special 
(Chapter XXIII) 
Confused and 
dark 
(not finished by 
St John) 
Visions
(Chapter XXIV) 
Locutions 
(Chapter XXVIII) 
Revelations 
(Chapter XXV) 
Spiritual 
feelings 
(Chapter XXIII)
Contemplation 
given in faith 
Hearing 
Tasting 
Smelling 
Touching 
Seeing 
Passively
presented to 
imagination and 
fancy 
Secret mysteries 
(Chapter XXVII) 
Intellectual 
(Chapter XXVI) 
Formal 
(Chapter XXX) 
Substantial 
(Chapter XXXI) 
Corporeal 
(Chapter XXIV) 
Incorporeal 
(Chapter XXIV) 
Successive 
(Chapter XXIX) 
Figure 1. St John's classification of supernatural experiences.
Note: Chapter numbers refer to where this is discussed in Book II of The Ascent of Mount Carmel.
194
S.R. Jones

St John says that these visions are very rare, only occurring ''occasionally and
fleetingly . . . At such times He totally withdraws the spirit from this life, and the natural
functions of the body are supplied by His favour'' (p. 188). St John gives an example of
this type of experience from St Paul (2 Corinthians, 12:4: ''Saint Paul saw these
[incorporeal substances in the third heaven], that Saint says: Sive in corpore, nescio, sive
extra corpus, nescio, Deus scit. That is, he was raptured, and of that which he saw
he says that he knows not if it was in the body or out of the body, but that God knows''
(p. 189).
5. Supernatural! Spiritual! Distinct & special! Revelations ! Intellectual
These are, according to St John (1943), an ''intuition of naked truths'' (p. 194) not
expressible in words, and of two types. The first are directly to do with God, and ''when
such knowledge is given to a soul, words are used, the soul is well aware that it has
expressed no part of what it has felt; for it knows that there is no fit name by which it
can name it'' (p. 195). St John again cites Saint Paul as undergoing such an experience
''when he was granted that lofty knowledge of God, made no attempt to describe it,
saying only that it was not lawful for man to speak of it'' (p. 195). St John states that
these experiences are so exquisite that even if a person ''received only one of them it
would consider itself well rewarded for all the trials that it had suffered in this life''
(p. 196). The second type differs by being of things lower than God. St John describes
how ''herein is included the perception of the truth of things in themselves, and that of
the events and happenings which come to pass among men'' (p. 198). For example, ''at
times, though he understand not the words, as when they are in Latin and he knows not
that
tongue,
the
knowledge
of
their
meaning
comes
to
him,
despite
his
not
understanding them'' (p. 202). Again, such experiences are related by St Paul (see
1 Corinthians 2:10)
6. Supernatural!Spiritual!Distinct & special!Revelations! Secret Mysteries
Again, these come in two types. St John (1943) argues the first relates to ''that which God
is in Himself'' (p. 204), and the second to ''that which God is in His works, and herein are
included the other articles of our Catholic faith'' (p. 204). In terms of the second type,
St John explains how these can include receipt of knowledge of information such as ''how
many days they still have to live, or what trials they are to suffer, or what is to befall such
and such a person, or such and such a kingdom'' (p. 205). These experiences may also
include theological insights. Although St John talks about the content of these experiences
he, unfortunately, does not give a detailed description of the phenomenology of the
experience itself.
7. Supernatural! Spiritual! Distinct & special! Locutions ! Successive
St John (1943) next examines ''supernatural locutions, which are apt to come to the spirits
of spiritual persons without the intervention of any bodily sense'' (p. 208). He claims that
such locutions (i.e. hearing sounds and voices) may be reduced to three types: successive,
formal and substantial. Successive locutions always come when the person is absorbed in
meditation, when the person ''by means of its reasoning discovers things which it knew not
with respect to the subject of its reflections, so that it seems not to be doing this itself, but
rather it seems that another person is supplying the reasoning within its mind or answering
its questions or teaching it'' (p. 209). He says that in this state the soul ''is reasoning
with itself and answering itself as though it were two persons convening together; and in
some ways this is really so . . . and thus it utters them to itself as though to a third person''
(p. 209).
Mental Health, Religion & Culture
195

8. Supernatural ! Spiritual ! Distinct & special ! Locutions ! Formal
Formal locutions, which may be experienced both in and out of meditative states, are
so-termed by St John (1943) as they are ''communicated to the spirit formally by a third
person, the spirit itself playing no part in this'' (p. 215). Whereas successive locutions come
when a person is thinking on a topic, and are related to it, formal locutions may come out
of the blue, such as when the person is ''far from thinking of the subject of what is being
said to it'' (p. 216). Such words may be clearly formed or not, and there may be only one
word, or many. They are ''frequently like conceptions in which something is said to the
spirit, whether in the form of a reply to it or in that of another manner of address'' (p. 216).
Furthermore, they ''are apt to be continuous, either instructing the soul or discussing
something with it'' (p. 216). St John notes that, ''sometimes the words succeed one another
like those already described, for they are apt to be continuous, either instructing the soul
or discussing something with it; and all this comes to pass without any part being played
therein by the spirit, for it is just as though one person were speaking with another''
(p. 216). He gives the example of Daniel (Daniel 9:22) who had an angel speak within him
and give him instructions. St John also gives the example of Moses (Exodus 3:10), being
commanded by God to go to and deliver his people from Pharaoh. Notably here, Moses
showed ''such great repugnance that He had to command him three times to do it and to
perform signs for him'' (p. 216), suggesting that such locutions have the potential to be
repetitive and insistent.
9. Supernatural ! Spiritual ! Distinct & special ! Locutions ! Substantial
St John (1943) describes how these differ from formal locutions in that they ''produce vivid
and substantial effects upon the soul, whereas words which are merely formal do not''
(p. 219). Indeed, he claims that ''they are of such moment and price that they are life
and virtue and incomparable good to the soul; for one of these words works greater
good within the soul than all that the soul itself has done throughout its life'' (p. 219).
St John gives the example of a person in a state of great fear suddenly hearing God saying
to them ''Fear thou not'' (p. 219) and that this made them feel ''great fortitude and
tranquillity'' (p. 219).
10. Supernatural! Spiritual ! Distinct & special !Spiritual feelings
St John (1943) claims that of ''these touches, some are distinct and pass quickly away;
others are less distinct and last longer'' (p. 222). In this experience ''an apprehension of
knowledge or intelligence frequently overflows . . . into the understanding; and this is
normally a most sublime perception of God . . . to which no name can be given'' (p. 222).
Again, unfortunately, St John only gives limited phenomenological information on this
class of experience.
11. Supernatural ! Spiritual ! Confused and dark
St John (1943) believed the ''confused, general and dark'' (p. 101) type of knowledge was
what the soul should aim for. However, he does not come back to this topic to give specific
details of this experience. Indeed, The Ascent of Mount Carmel remained unfinished, the
treatise coming to an end in the middle of a sentence (Peers, 1943).
Discernment of hallucinations
Having examined the phenomenology of the hallucinations described by St John, it is also
worth analysing his, and St Teresa's, writings on the discernment of such experiences,
which give further insights into the phenomenology of hallucinations. There is a long
196
S.R. Jones

tradition within Christianity of trying to discern (or differentiate) between whether
hallucinations are from God, the devil or merely from natural causes/imagination. The
first important aspect of discernment is whether the experiences are supernatural (i.e. sent
by agents such as God or the devil) or whether they are merely self-produced naturally.
St John (1943) was concerned that people who heard voices during contemplative prayer
would simply assume these were communications from God, rather than considering the
alternative, namely that they may be merely self-produced. He wrote that ''I am appalled
at what happens in these days - namely, when some soul with the very smallest experience
of meditation, if it be conscious of certain locutions of this kind in some state of
recollection, at once christens them all as coming from God, and assumes that this is the
case, saying: ''God said to me . . . ''; ''God answered me . . . ''; whereas it is not so at all, but,
as we have said, it is for the most part they who are saying these things to themselves'' (p. 210,
italics added).
To address this problem St Teresa (2007) proposed a number of criteria for identifying
genuine supernatural communications. First, she argued that genuine locutions are heard
clearly (not like something half-heard in a dream), and so clearly that the phrasing can be
noted, including any speech errors such as omission of syllables. Second, genuine locutions
come unexpectedly, sometimes even during the middle of a conversation. Third, they refer
to things that ''one never thought would or could happen, so that the imagination cannot
possibly have invented them'' (p. 101). Fourth, they ''contain a world of meaning such as
the understanding alone could never put rapidly into human language'' (St Teresa, 2007).
Fifth, not only can words be heard, but more is understood than merely what the words
say. Sixth, if the locutions are genuine they cannot be ignored (which imagined voices can).
Instead, ''we have no ears which we can stop, nor have we the power to refrain from
thought'' (p. 102). Finally, St Teresa argues that if locutions merely come from the
imagination, then there is no accompanying certainty, peace or inner consolation.
Once a hallucination had been discerned as genuine (i.e. having a supernatural source),
it then needed to be further discerned as to whether the source was God or the devil.
St Teresa (2007) set out a number of characteristics which she believed indicated
they came from God. The ''first and truest,'' she claimed, was ''the sense of power
and authority which they bear with them'' (p. 97). She gives the example of a troubled
person hearing the phrase ''Be not troubled'' (p. 97), with this being enough to calm
them. A second characteristic is that ''a great tranquillity dwells in the soul,'' (p. 98), and a
third, that the words ''do not vanish from the memory for a very long time: some, indeed,
never vanish at all'' (p. 98). Furthermore, such words, if referring to the future, are felt to
have a complete certainty.
St John (1943) also set out criteria for discerning between experiences from God and
those from the devil. First, he argued that the more completely exterior and corporeal they
are, the less likely they were to be from God, and more likely to be from the devil. He also
believed external and corporeal experiences communicated less ''than would be the case if
the same things were more interior and spiritual'' (p. 103). Second, he argued that if a
communication is from God it produces ''its effect upon the spirit at the very moment
when it appears or is felt, without giving the soul time or opportunity to deliberate whether
it will accept or reject it . . . It is as though fire were applied to a person's naked body:
it would matter little whether or not he wished to be burned; the fire would of necessity
accomplish its work'' (p. 103). St Teresa echoes St John's criteria, arguing that locutions
from the devil are pronounced very clearly, can be easily understood, do not leave room
for confusion, leave the soul in turmoil and restlessness, and encourage pride.
Mental Health, Religion & Culture
197

Lessons from St John's classifications of hallucinations
A number of key phenomenological dimensions of these hallucinations can now be
identified. This allows the questions raised in the first part of this paper to be addressed,
namely are these phenomenological dimensions identifiable in hallucinations today, and
addressed in contemporary research?
Exteriority-interiority
St John clearly differentiated between hallucinations received through external bodily
senses, and those received through internal bodily senses. Indeed, both he and St
Teresa are very clear that such experiences exist on a continuum of internality-
externality. This distinction parallels Jaspers' (1962) distinction between hallucinations
proper, which are perceived to originate externally, from outside the individual, and
''pseudohallucinations,'' which are perceived to originate in the head. However, Berrios
(1996) has argued that the concept of pseudohallucinations is ''irretrievably fuzzy, and
needs to be abandoned'' (p. 60), with Bentall (2003) observing that, ''most modern
psychologists and psychiatrists lump both types of experience together'' (p. 350).
Notwithstanding this, phenomenological studies today still address the interior/exterior
dimension of hallucinations. For example, Leudar et al. (1997) found that 71% of
voice-hearers (from both psychiatric and non-psychiatric participants) reported hearing
voices only ''in their heads,'' 18% only through their ears and 11% in both ways.
Research in this area has highlighted a specific region of the brain's auditory cortex
(the planum temporale) as underlying this externality feature of the heard-voice
(Hunter, 2004). However, contemporary research does not pay detailed attention to
phenomenological differences between interior and exterior voices identified by St John,
which I turn to next.
Perfection, vividness and beauty
St John (1943) stresses that hallucinations involving the internal senses are qualitatively
different from those involving the external senses, being potentially ''much more beautiful
and perfect'' (p. 131). Additionally, in his differentiation between corporeal and
incorporeal ''distinct and special visions,'' he argues that corporeal visions are associated
with a great brightness and are much ''clearer and subtler'' (p. 190) than normal vision.
Although numerous modern studies have documented the occurrence of internal voices
(Leudar et al., 1997; Sedman, 1966; Stephane et al., 2003) contemporary research has
failed to enquire whether internal voices experienced in clear consciousness are
qualitatively different in terms of perfection, vividness or beauty, to externally located
voices. In other conditions, however, such as during near-death experiences (NDEs), it is
common for the vividness and beauty of the hallucinations to be remarked upon (e.g.
Greyson, 2006). For example, one report of a vision during NDEs stated it ''was not like
normal vision. It was brighter and more focused and clearer than normal vision,'' and
furthermore that there was ''a clearer hearing than with my ears'' (Kelly et al., 2006,
p. 393). Indeed, individuals commonly report that their perceptions were more vivid
during NDEs than normal (Greyson, 2006). This increased vividness of perceptions forms
one of the items on Greyson's (1985) NDE Scale, which gives accepted criteria for such
experiences. Thus, although such vividness of images has been noted in NDE research, this
198
S.R. Jones

and other associated qualitative differences has not received much attention in relation to
internally/externally located hallucinations in clear consciousness, and is deserving of more
attention.
Illuminated by the light
St John notes that both corporeal and incorporeal ''distinct and special visions'' are
associated with a peculiar illumination and light. In particular, he claims that light is
particularly intense in visions of incorporeal substances (such as angels), which can
only be seen by the aid of the ''illumination of glory'' (p. 187). The quality of a
strange illumination is often characteristic of voices and visions experienced in the
hypnagogic (just before falling asleep) and hypnopompic (just after waking) states. For
example, Mavromatis (1988) notes that one ''standout feature'' (p. 29) of visions in
such states is the manner of illumination. He reports examples of such experiences
which describe them as being ''highly illuminated,'' ''by far the most brilliant and
purest colours I have ever seen,'' ''unnaturally lit,'' and even ''made of fire'' (p. 29).
The vividness and clarity of such experiences are also notable, with visions often
having ''a microscopic clearness of detail'' (p. 29). NDEs are also associated with
reports of individuals seeing or being surrounded by an incredible light (Greyson,
1985). Morse and Perry (1992) have argued that ''the experience of light . . . [is] the
keynote event of the near-death experience'' (p. 196) and that ''loving white light'' (p.
196) is the essence of the NDE. For example, a 31-year-old woman reported the
following encounter with such light in an NDE during open heart surgery, ''I could
feel this love just coming from that light. It was all around me. It wasn't a beam. It
was just the feeling of it coming from that light. It was so beautiful! I could never
explain it in a million years'' (Greyson, 2006, p. 396). Such a property is hence well
documented today, though it still remains unknown as to what mechanism underlies
this phenomenological property, and whether hallucinations in clear consciousness
feature this property.
In-or out-of-the-body
St John claims that during incorporeal visions (but not in corporeal visions) the individual
may not know whether they were in, or out, of the body. This facet of hallucinations has
also been identified and studied today. For example, work on out-of-body experiences
(Blanke, Landis, Spinelli, & Seeck, 2004) in neurological patients has studied the
phenomenon of the feeling one has left one's body, and examined the neural areas
associated with such experiences. However, such experiences are not normally associated
with the unnatural illumination and light that St John mentions. Instead, out-of-body
experiences and descriptions of bright otherworldly light are only typically found
occurring together during NDEs (Greyson, 2006). It is also not known how often such
experiences are co-morbid with hallucinations in clear consciousness, and if so, whether
there
are
potential
shared
mechanisms.
One
commonality
between
out-of-body
experiences and auditory verbal hallucinations (AVHs) is that the former involve viewing
the body from an external visual viewpoint, whilst the latter typically involve voices
verbally addressing the hearer from an external viewpoint. For example, there may be
second person AVHs (e.g. ''you're an idiot'') and/or third person AVHs (e.g. ''he's picking
his nose'').
Mental Health, Religion & Culture
199

Non-verbal information
A characteristic of intellectual visions is that these experiences appear to be hard to put
into words, although information is clearly somehow received. This also seems to be a
characteristic of St John's category of the ''revelation of secret mysteries.'' Here, truths are
communicated but again apparently without being explicitly stated. This experience is
prominent, today, in NDEs. During NDEs individuals often report having had insights
into the nature of being and life that is very hard to put into words upon their return
(Greyson, 2006). As such, this experience is directly asked about in item 4 (''Did you
suddenly seem to understand everything?'') of Greyson's (1985) NDE Scale.
The experience of receiving information without words, which St John appears to
highlight, was also identified by a number of nineteenth-century psychiatrists, as being
experienced in clear consciousness by patients with schizophrenia. Bleuler (1952) termed
these experiences ''soundless voices'' (p. 110). In such AVHs a message or meaning is
communicated although it is not actually heard. For example, a patient of Bleuler's who
threw himself into the Rhine reported afterwards that ''It was as if someone pointed his
finger at me and said ''Go and drown yourself'' (p. 111, italics added). Janet also noted this
phenomenon, giving the example of a patient who reported that ''it is not a voice, I do not
hear anything, I sense that I am spoken to.'' More recently, Jones (in press) has suggested
that contemporary inner-speech-based models of AVHs can account for such experiences,
but notes that more research is needed into these relatively neglected forms of
hallucinations.
Voices that save
St John's classification of locutions (hearing voices) as successive, formal and substantial is
also informative. In terms of successive locutions, an interesting question this raises is how
often those with hallucinations experience these as a result of meditating on a topic, and
how often the voices are in line with their current flow of thoughts. The congruity of voices
with the ongoing thoughts in the individual's stream of consciousness has not received
attention in the research literature. In terms of formal locutions, St John's identification of
such types of voices, which come out of the blue and often command and instruct, has
been highlighted in the research into hearing voices. Indeed, the pragmatics of voices, their
tendency in around 70-80% of patients with schizophrenia to give instructions/commands
has already been identified as a key property of voices (Leudar et al., 1997; Nayani
& David, 1996). However, in addition to commands, St John notes that formal locutions
may involve a ''discussion'' between the voice-hearer and the voice. The frequency and
extent of such ''dialogic'' voices (Jones & Fernyhough, 2007) remain unaddressed by
contemporary research.
Substantial locutions are an exceptionally interesting class of voices identified by St
John. Recall, that ''one of these words works greater good within the soul than all that the
soul itself has done throughout its life.'' This type of voice is that which St Teresa
identified as being characteristic of God. St Teresa noted that phrases heard such as ''It is
I [God], fear not'' (p. 98) may be exceedingly powerful, calming and influential, and the
memory of such auditions may remain for a lifetime. Such voices are still reported today.
For example, Heathcote-James (2001) cites a contemporary account of a healthy
woman, in a distressing situation, hearing a voice saying ''But you have trust in God''
(p. 123). As a result of this, the woman described how she ''felt great consolation and joy.
I just cannot describe the sense that I felt, it was so beautiful it was indescribable'' (p. 123).
200
S.R. Jones

However, such experiences are only found in scattered reports and have not been
systematically and scientifically studied. Such voices do not appear to be specific to any
particular diagnostic category, or even necessarily associated with psychiatric problems,
but rather seem triggered by specific circumstances. One type of situation where they seem
to occur is in conditions where the individual is in danger, stress or under physical or
existential threat. For example, the mountaineer Joe Simpson (Simpson, 1988), after a
horrific climbing accident, was forced to crawl for four days back to his friends' base-
camp. During the latter stages of his infernal journey he began to hear a voice which was
''clean and sharp and commanding'' (p. 141) and which told him to ''Go on, keep going''
(p. 147). Such experiences are also associated with alcoholism and delirium tremens
(delirium resulting from chronic alcohol use). For example, during a period of his life
where he was significantly negatively affected by alcohol, Sir Anthony Hopkins reports
hearing a voice. He described how ''It was as if a voice said, 'Ready! Go!' It was that clear,
the voice of gold. The best part of myself, my subconscious, came to rescue me. I don't
know how. I had no religious connection or a connection to what I thought was God''
(Hopkins, 2009). Similarly, Heathcote-James (2001) reports numerous examples of voices
warning people that ''the boiler's overheating'' (p. 116), or encouraging them to ''keep
going'' (p. 122) in times of despair. This fascinating class of voices remains under-
researched, and there is a clear need to further understand these experiences which I term
''voices that save.''
Spiritual feelings: Sensed presences hard to describe
This type of experience which St John identifies as being, ''normally a most sublime
perception of God . . . to which no name can be given,'' is hard to understand from the little
he writes on this. One poor cousin of this experience reported today is the perception of a
felt presence. Such experiences are today studied and found in a variety of states. For
example, feelings of an unknown felt presence are common in hypnagogic states (Jones et
al., 2009). They can also be experimentally induced in clear consciousness. For example,
Persinger (2001), through the application of a magnetic field to the right hemisphere of the
brain, has induced the experience of ''a 'sensed presence' or sentient being'' (p. 517) in
some individuals. More intense encounters with the presence of an unknown other are
experienced under the influence of psychedelic drugs, especially dimethyltriptamine and
psilocybin (e.g. McKenna, 1993). Such users also commonly report the property that
St John observes of spiritual feelings, namely how hard such experiences are to translate
into words (McKenna, 1993). The difficulty of translating such experiences into words is
also found in voices heard during NDEs. For example, Moody (1975) claims that
individuals who undergo NDEs ''uniformly characterize their experiences as ineffable, that
is inexpressible'' (p. 25). Such comments are typically of the form of ''[t]here are no words
to express what I am trying to say'' (p. 25). The perception of a being, which is hard to put
into words, is hence a fairly well-explored experience today.
Lessons from St John's and Teresa's writings on discernment
One property of hallucinations that would have been interesting to investigate in
St Teresa's and St John's writings is whether they found communications from God to be
more or less frequent than those from the devil. Contemporary research has shown that
whereas in the 1930s verbal hallucinations which gave commands were generally positive,
Mental Health, Religion & Culture
201

for example, ''be good and go to heaven,'' ''live right,'' those in the 1980s were more likely
to be negative, for example, ''kill yourself,'' ''set fire to the lawn'' (Mitchell & Vierkant,
1989). However, St John and St Teresa give no indication as to which of these they found
to be more frequent. However, there are multiple other interesting findings which can be
seen from their writings on discernment.
Self-produced experiences
St John observed that self-produced AVHs were possible. This is in line with many
modern theories of AVHs that conceive of them as self-alienated inner speech (e.g. Bentall,
2003; Jones & Fernyhough, 2007). Indeed, some contemporary voice-hearers describe
their experiences in this way. For example, the mathematician John Nash, whose life
story was (somewhat inaccurately) retold in the film A Beautiful Mind, has claimed
that ''You're really talking to yourself is what the voices are'' (MacLowry & Samels, 2002).
Unexpectedness
In terms of discerning genuine locutions, St Teresa argued that genuine locutions are
heard clearly, so clearly in fact that the phraseology is clear, and if any syllables are
omitted, this can be noted. Such aspects of hearing voices are still enquired about today,
with even the accent of voices being identified by voice-hearers, and inquired about by
researchers (e.g. Nayani & David, 1996). St Teresa also notes that genuine locutions
come unexpectedly, sometimes during a conversation. Although such experiences are
today identified as being ''intrusive'' (Morrison, Haddock, & Tarrier, 1995), the actual
unexpectedness of auditory hallucinations has not been considered in detail. It is not
understood if these experiences are actually unexpected or whether they are actually
triggered by subtle factors, such as negative affect or particular triggering thoughts (e.g.
specific memories). This area is hence in need of more research, and will need to be
examined using methodologies such as Experience Sampling (e.g. Thewissen, Bentall,
Lecomte, van Os, & Myin-Germeys, 2008). In this technique, participants wear beepers
which go off at random points of the day, and then participants are asked to write down
their current thoughts, emotion and any hallucinatory experiences. Such an approach
would be able to answer the question as to how unexpected or unpredictable such
locutions are.
Novelty
St Teresa (2007) claims that voices with a divine source refer to things that ''one never
thought would or could happen, so that the imagination cannot possibly have invented
them'' (p. 101). This highlights the potentially creative nature of such experiences.
However, this aspect of AVHs is not formally researched today. This is possibly due to the
bio-medical paradigm encouraging the idea that AVHs are simply random, worthless
productions of an abnormal brain. However, there is anecdotal evidence suggesting that
novel and creative AVHs are still experienced. For example, authors report receiving
inspiring and novel ideas directly from their hallucinations (Malone, 2006) and many
personal accounts highlight the novel and original nature of AVHs (e.g. Romme & Escher,
1993). A better understanding is hence required of this area.
202
S.R. Jones

Density of meaning
St Teresa also highlights that divine locutions may possess a density of meaning, in which
much can be understood than simply what the words say. This phenomenological property
of AVHs has not been formally addressed in contemporary research into AVHs in clear
consciousness.
Power and authority
St Teresa's (2007) ''first and truest'' sign that the voices were from God, she argued, was
''the sense of power and authority which they bear with them'' (p. 97). This property of
AVHs is very familiar today. For example, Chadwick and Birchwood (1994) in a study of
AVHs in patients with schizophrenia noted that ''Without exception, voices were seen as
omnipotent . . . For many patients this . . . was supported by . . . the patient having no
influence over the voice. Also, all voices were seen as omniscient, again emphasising their
superhuman quality . . . people feel caught in their power'' (p. 200).
Direct effects
St John argued that communications from God have their effect ''at the very moment
when it appears or is felt, without giving the soul time or opportunity to deliberate whether
it will accept or reject it.'' This instant nature of communication could be seen to be
paralleled today in NDEs. Individuals who have had NDEs often report direct, unimpeded
transfer of thoughts taking place (Moody, 1975). For example, Leister (1998) reports an
individual who described the communications she received during her NDE as being
''instant'' and a form of ''thought transfer'' (p. 239). Again, this experience has not been
examined in the literature on hallucinations in clear consciousness.
Conclusions
The core aim of this paper was to determine whether an examination of the
phenomenology of hallucinations in sixteenth-century Spain could inform the study of
hallucinations today. It may be objected that the present paper has attempted to stretch
the contemporary concept of a ''hallucination'' to cover experiences reported by St John of
the Cross, which were not of this type. To anticipate this argument, the present paper has
conceded that the contemporary concept of a ''hallucination'' does not refer to an object
with an independent ontological existence, and noted that it would be inappropriate to
violently force historical experiences into this concept. Instead, due to the argument that
the term ''hallucination'' is inherently pejorative (Sarbin & Juhasz, 1967), and the
disputation of the hegemony of the term ''hallucination'' by many service-users (Romme
& Escher, 1993), the term hallucination has been used in this paper to refer both to
contemporary and historically situated experiences, that would otherwise naively be
referred to as hallucinations. It is also worth reiterating that the aim of this paper was not
to prove that St John of the Cross had ''hallucinations,'' but instead to examine how his
conception of the phenomenology of hallucinations may help us gain a greater
understanding of the potential phenomenology of hallucinations today.
As a result of the analyses performed in this paper, a number of phenomenological
properties of hallucinations that are neglected by contemporary research were identified.
First, it was found that the phenomenological differences between internally and externally
Mental Health, Religion & Culture
203

located AVHs have been overlooked in contemporary research. This may be because the
metaphor of ''hearing voices'' has encouraged a literal interpretation of the experience,
resulting in the sidelining of internal voices. The projection by researchers of the widely
understandable experience of hearing an external voice (we all know what it is like to hear
another person's voice) onto voice-hearers' experiences, may have led to the more obscure
and less empathically available experience of hearing an internal voice, and its specific
phenomenology being overlooked. Indeed, as Laroi et al. (submitted) have noted,
''patients often clarify that the largely recurrent designation of AVH [auditory verbal
hallucinations] as 'voices', does not exhaust their phenomenic richness.'' Research is only
just beginning to identify how often AVHs are actually experienced as more internal,
thought-like events, than external perceptions (Moritz & Larøi, 2008). St John's proposal
that internal voices and visions had the properties of being clearer, more vivid, perfect and
beautiful, than external voices was highlighted as being properties of AVHs during the
hypnagogic state and in NDEs today. However, no work has examined whether this is also
true of internal voices and visions experienced in clear consciousness. It may be that such
properties encourage the attribution of such experiences to supernatural sources. It was
also noted that the potential for voices and visions experienced in clear consciousness to be
accompanied by the presence of a strange illumination has not been researched.
The experience, identified by St John, of receiving information through a transmission
mechanism which does not involve explicit verbal information has also been relatively
overlooked. More research is hence needed into this area of what has been termed
''soundless voices.'' Such hallucinations may provide valuable theoretical and empirical
insights into questions such as whether thought is performed through the medium of
verbal language or a symbolic mentalese system (Carruthers, 2002).
St John's writings on locutions also raised a number of interesting avenues for
research. For example, how often do those with AVHs experience these as a result of
meditating on a topic, and how often are such AVHs consistent with the voice-hearer's
current flow of thoughts? Such questions have not been addressed in the contemporary
hallucinations literature. The experience of, what I have termed, ''voices that save'' is also
a potentially fascinating area of study, which could potentially shine light on mechanisms
of creativity, agency and dissociation, and is hence clearly deserving of targeted research.
The review of discernment also raised a number of interesting areas for future research.
First, it was noted that the unexpectedness, or at least apparent unexpectedness of voices
was an interesting area, and suggestions were made for appropriate methodologies to
probe this area further. St Teresa's claims that genuine voices refer to novel, original
information also needs to be followed up. There is currently a complete lack of studies
which examine the creative nature of such experiences, and how they can give original
information to the voice-hearer that they themselves could not have consciously and
intentionally accessed. There is hence the need to understand first how common
hallucinations are that transmit novel, original information to the voice-hearer, and
second what mechanisms underlie this experience. St Teresa also noted the density of
meaning contained in genuine locutions. This property of hallucinations is also neglected
today, and is deserving of further research.
As noted in the Introduction, insights from phenomenological analyses should ideally
aim to inform or, to use Gallagher and Sorenson's (2006) term, ''front-load'' experimental
designs. The phenomenological insights highlighted in this paper are able to offer a
number of implications for future experimental design. First, at present, most studies
compare the cognitive abilities, or neurological activation of, a group of individuals who
experience hallucinations, with a control group consisting of individuals who never/very
204
S.R. Jones

rarely hallucinate. However, if the hallucinating group consists of individuals with highly
phenomenologically divergent hallucinations, then this is likely to confound such
comparisons. For example, individuals with hallucinations which communicate novel
and original information may well have different underlying mechanisms to those who
experience more repetitive, unoriginal productions. Thus there is likely to be the need to
study sub-groups of hallucinations (see also, Jones, in press). Second, the observations by
St Teresa and St John suggest that hallucinatory experiences exist on a spectrum ranging
from, at one extreme, a clear external voice telling the individual something (which may or
may not be believed by the voice-hearer), to, at the other end of a spectrum, a form of
communication of information to the hearer which is not explicitly enunciated by a voice,
but is felt to be said or communicated to the person, and furthermore, is immediately felt
to be true (or ''divine'' in nature and origin). The phenomenology of the latter experience
starts to be more like a delusional belief (in that it is a form of information given to the
person which they are convinced by, even though it may appear incorrect to others) than
like a hallucination. This suggests that delusions could be understood as a form of
hallucination, sharing some underlying mechanisms with hallucinatory experiences. Such a
linkage between hallucinations and delusions is consistent with the observation that in
patients with schizophrenia, hallucinations commonly co-occur with delusions (APA,
2000). The suggestion of such a link between hallucinations and delusions means that
future experimental designs may address common factors underlying the tendency to both
hallucinate, and experience delusions.
Although it has been claimed that our ''age of the chattering mass can but little
sympathise with [St John] a man of silence, recollection, and self-discernment'' (Herrera,
p. 48), it has been demonstrated in this paper that most of the hallucinations described by
St John and St Teresa, are not unrecognisable today. Many of these experiences are found
today in conditions such as schizophrenia, NDEs, hypnagogia, or under the influence of
psychedelics. This is somewhat remarkable given that St John's and Teresa's writings
largely drew on personal experiences obtained through contemplative meditation. This
raises the question as to why all these experiences share some common phenomenological
aspects. It may be that there are mechanisms common to all these experiences. However,
there is presently a lack of dialogue between those studying hallucinations in different
conditions and disciplines. The inter-disciplinary study of hallucinations, with contribu-
tions from specialists in theology, schizophrenia, epilepsy, NDEs, hypnagogia and
psychedelics, and the differing paradigms such researchers work within, would hence seem
highly likely to be fruitful for advancing our understanding of these still most mysterious
phenomena.
References
Aleman, A., & Larøi, F. (2008). Hallucinations: The science of idiosyncratic perception. Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association.
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders.
(4th ed. Rev). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
Bentall, R.P. (2003). Madness explained: Psychosis and human nature. London: Penguin Books.
Berrios, G.E. (1996). The history of mental symptoms: Descriptive psychopathology since the 19th
century. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bhugra, D. (Ed.). (1996). Psychiatry and religion. London: Routledge.
Mental Health, Religion & Culture
205

Blanke, O., Landis, T., Spinelli, L., & Seeck, M. (2004). Out-of-body experience and autoscopy of
neurological origin. Brain, 127, 243-258.
Bleuler, E. (1952). Dementia Praecox or the group of schizophrenias. New York: International
Universities Press.
Borch-Jacobsen, M. (2001). Making psychiatric history: Madness as folie a plusieurs. History of the
Human Sciences, 14, 19-38.
Brenan, G. (1975). St John of the Cross: His life and poetry. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Carruthers, P. (2002). The cognitive functions of language. Behavioural and Brain Sciences, 25,
657-726.
Chadwick, P., & Birchwood, M. (1994). The omnipotence of voices: A cognitive approach to
auditory hallucinations. British Journal of Psychiatry, 164, 190-201.
Clarke, I. (2001). Psychosis and spirituality; Exploring the new frontier. London: Whurr.
David, A.S. (2004). The cognitive neuropsychiatry of auditory verbal hallucinations: An overview.
Cognitive Neuropsychiatry, 9, 107-123.
Derrida, J. (1998). Of grammatology (G.C. Spivak, Trans.). Baltimore, MD: John Hopkins
University Press.
Fogleman, A. (2009). Finding a middle way: Late medieval naturalism and visionary experience.
Visual Resources, 25, 7-28.
Gallagher, S., & Sørensen, J.B. (2006). Experimenting with phenomenology. Consciousness and
Cognition, 15, 119-134.
Greyson, B. (1985). The near-death experience scale. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 171,
369-375.
Greyson, B. (2006). Near-death experiences and spirituality. Zygon, 41, 393-414.
Heathcote-James, E. (2001). Seeing angels. London: John Blake.
Herrera, R.A. (2004). Silent music: The life, work, and thought of St. John of the Cross. Cambridge:
William B. Eerdmans.
Hopkins, A. (2009). Golden Voice Saved me from Alcoholism. Retrieved 11, June 2009, from http://
hearingvoicesmovement.blogspot.com/2008/06/anthony-hopkins-golden-voice-saved-me.html
Hunter, M.D. (2004). Locating voices in space: A perceptual model for auditory hallucinations?
Cognitive Neuropsychiatry, 9, 93-105.
Jackson, M.C., & Fulford, K.W.M. (1997). Spiritual experience and psychopathology. Philosophy,
Psychiatry and Psychology, 1, 41-65.
James, T. (1995). Dreams, creativity, and madness in nineteenth-century France. Oxford: Clarendon
Press.
Jaspers, K. (1962). General psychopathology. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Jones,
S.R.
(in
press).
Do
we
need
multiple
models
of
auditory
verbal
hallucinations?
Examining the phenomenological fit of cognitive and neurological models. Schizophrenia
Bulletin.
Jones, S.R., & Fernyhough, C. (2007). Neural correlates of inner speech and auditory verbal
hallucinations: A critical review and theoretical integration. Clinical Psychology Review, 27,
140-154.
Jones, S.R., & Fernyhough, C. (2008). Speaking back to the spirits: The voices and visions of
Emanuel Swedenborg. History of the Human Sciences, 21, 1-31.
Jones, S.R., Fernyhough, C., & Meads, D. (2009). In a dark time: Assessment and modeling of
hypnagogic hallucinations. Personality and Individual Differences, 46, 30-34.
Kavanaugh, K., & Rodriguez, O. (1991). The collected works of St. John of the cross. Washington,
DC: ICS Publications.
Kelly, E.F., Kelly, E.W., Crabtree, A., Gauld, A., Grosso, W., & Greyson, B. (2006). Irreducible
mind: Toward a psychology for the 21st century. New York: Rowman & Littlefield.
Kroll, J., & Bachrach, B. (1982). Visions and psychopathology in the middle ages. Journal of Nervous
and Mental Disorders, 170, 41-49.
Kroll, J., & Bachrach, B. (2005). The mystical mind: The psychology of medieval mystics and ascetics.
London: Routledge.
206
S.R. Jones

Larøi, F., de Hann, S., Jones, S.R., & Raballo, A. (submitted). Auditory verbal hallucinations:
Dialoguing between the cognitive sciences and phenomenology. Phenomenology and the
Cognitive Sciences.
Leister, M.B. (1998). Inner communications following the near-death experience. Journal of Near-
Death Studies, 16, 233-248.
Leudar, I., & Thomas, P. (2000). Voices of reason, voices of insanity: Studies of verbal hallucinations.
London: Routledge.
Leudar, I., Thomas, P., McNally, D., & Glinski, A. (1997). What voices can do with words:
Pragmatics of verbal hallucinations. Psychological Medicine, 27, 885-898.
McKenna, T. (1993). True hallucinations. New York: Harper Collins.
MacLowry, R. (Producer), & Samels, M. (Director). (2002). A brilliant madness [Motion picture].
Boston: WGBH Educational Foundation.
Maitland, S. (2008). A book of silence. London: Granta.
Malone, D. (Producer and Director). (2006, June 18). Voices in My Head [Television broadcast].
London: Channel 4.
Mavromatis, A. (1988). Hypnagogia. London: Routledge.
Mitchell, J., & Vierkant, A.D. (1989). Delusions and hallucinations as a reflection of the subcultural
milieu among psychotic patients of the 1930s and 1980s. Journal of Psychology, 123, 269-274.
Moody, R.A. (1975). Life after life. Covington, GA: Mockingbird.
Moritz, S., & Larøi, F. (2008). Differences and similarities in the sensory and cognitive signatures of
voice-hearing, intrusions and thoughts. Schizophrenia Research, 102, 96-107.
Morrison, A.P., Haddock, G., & Tarrier, N. (1995). Intrusive thoughts and auditory hallucinations.
Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 23, 265-280.
Morse, M., & Perry, P. (1992). Transformed by the light. New York: Piatkus.
Nayani, T.H., & David, A.S. (1996). The auditory hallucination: A phenomenological survey.
Psychological Medicine, 26, 177-189.
Ohayon, M.M. (2000). Prevalence of hallucinations and their pathological associations in the general
population. Psychiatry Research, 27, 153-164.
Peers, E.A. (1943). Spirit of flame: A study of St John of the Cross. London: Student Christian
Movement Press.
Persinger, M.A. (2001). The neuropsychiatry of paranormal experiences. Journal of Neuropsychiatry
and Clinical Neuroscience, 13, 515-524.
Romme, M., & Escher, S. (1993). Accepting voices. Shaftesbury, UK: Mind.
Sarbin, T.R., & Juhasz, J.B. (1967). The historical background to the concept of hallucination.
Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences, 3, 339-358.
Sedman, G. (1966). Inner voices. British Journal of Psychiatry, 112, 485-499.
Simpson, J. (1988). Touching the void. London: Cape.
Slade, P., & Bentall, R. (1988). Sensory deception: A scientific analysis of hallucination. London:
Croon Helm.
Sperling, W., Bleich, S., Maiho¨ fner, C., & Reulbach, U. (2009). Auditory hallucinations in
schizophrenia - Outcry of a diseased brain? Medical Hypotheses, 72, 213-216.
St John of the Cross. (1943). The Complete Works of Saint John of the Cross. Vol. I. (E. A. Peers,
Trans.). London: Burns Oates.
St Teresa of Avila. (2007). Interior castle (E.A. Peers, Trans.). New York: Dover.
St Thomas Aquinas. (1920). Summa Theologica. (2nd Rev. ed.) (Fathers of the English Dominican
Province, Trans.). London: Burns & Oates.
Stephane, M., Thuras, P., Nasrallah, H., & Georgopoulos, A.P. (2003). The internal structure of the
phenomenology of auditory hallucinations. Schizophrenia Research, 61, 185-193.
Thewissen, V., Bentall, R., Lecomte, T., van Os., J., & Myin-Germeys, I. (2008). Paranoia and
fluctuations in self-esteem in the context of daily life. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 117,
143-153.
Tolkein, J.R.R. (1968). The lord of the rings. London: George Allen & Unwin.
Wittgenstein, L. (1953). Philosophical investigations. Oxford: Blackwell.
Mental Health, Religion & Culture
207

Zimmerman, B. (1910). St. John of the cross. In The Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert
Appleton Company. Retrieved June 9, 2009, from New Advent: http://www.newadvent.org/
cathen/08480a.htm.
Zimmerman, B. (1912). St. Teresa of Avila. In The Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert
Appleton Company. Retrieved June 9, 2009, from New Advent: http://www.newadvent.org/
cathen/14515b.htm.
208
S.R. Jones

