Philosophical Explorations
An International Journal for the Philosophy of Mind and Action
ISSN: 1386-9795 (Print) 1741-5918 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rpex20
Thinking of oneself as the thinker: the concept of
self and the phenomenology of intellection
Marie Guillot
To cite this article: Marie Guillot (2016) Thinking of oneself as the thinker: the concept of
self and the phenomenology of intellection, Philosophical Explorations, 19:2, 138-160, DOI:
10.1080/13869795.2016.1176232
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13869795.2016.1176232
Published online: 11 Aug 2016.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 512
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 10 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rpex20

This paper is part of the special issue "Conscious Thinking and Cognitive Phenomenology"
guest edited by Marta Jorba and Dermot Moran
Thinking of oneself as the thinker: the concept of self and the
phenomenology of intellection
Marie Guillot∗
Department of Philosophy, University College London, London, UK
(Received 4 April 2016; ﬁnal version received 5 April 2016)
Theindexicalword"I"hastraditionallybeenassumedtobeanovertanaloguetotheconcept
of self, and the best model for understanding it. This approach, I argue, overlooks the
essential role of cognitive phenomenology in the mastery of the concept of self. I suggest
that a better model is to be found in a different kind of representation: phenomenal
concepts or more generally phenomenally grounded concepts. I start with what I take to
be the deﬁning feature of the concept of self, namely its "super-reﬂexivity": to use this
concept is not just to think of oneself, but to think of oneself as the thinker of the present
thought. I call this familiar observation the "Thinker Intuition". I review some
shortcomings of the indexical model of the concept of self, which is the classical account
of the Thinker Intuition. I go on to propose a different account, the "phenomenal model",
according to which the concept of self is a phenomenally grounded concept, anchored in
a generic kind of cognitive phenomenology: the phenomenology of intellection.
Keywords: the concept of self; super-reﬂexivity; indexicality; phenomenal concepts;
cognitive phenomenology; the phenomenology of intellection
1.
Introduction
1.1.
The concept of self, super-reﬂexivity and the thinker intuition
The aim of this essay is to present and defend a new model for understanding the concept of
self, construing it as a phenomenally grounded concept anchored in a generic form of cog-
nitive phenomenology.
By "the concept of self", I do not mean the highly abstract, general concept philosophers
use to discuss, for instance, the nature of selfhood, the determinants of personal identity or
selves as a natural kind. I mean the concept that each of us uses to reﬂect on and store infor-
mation about themselves, speciﬁcally. It is the concept at play when I engage in introspection,
self-criticism, deliberation and action-planning: when I wonder whether I should join some
friends on a camping trip, when I notice with a tinge of self-reproach that I'm feeling luke-
warm, when I go over my memories of the last holiday and ask myself whether I really had as
good a time as I claimed, when I admit to myself that I'm not so fond of camping after all,
when I make the decision to stay at home by myself and let the others go without me.
It has long been noted1 that this concept of self, or I-concept for short, is the concept
one uses not just to think about oneself, but to think about oneself as oneself. To appreci-
ate the difference, consider situations where one thinks of someone who happens to be
oneself, without realising that that is the case. Examples of this include Oedipus as he
thinks of the murderer of King Laius while ignorant of his own guilt, or the winner
# 2016 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
∗Email: m.guillot@ucl.ac.uk
Philosophical Explorations, 2016
Vol. 19, No. 2, 138-160, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13869795.2016.1176232

of a lottery when she thinks, before the results are announced, of the winner of the lottery
with some envy. Oedipus and the unwitting lottery winner think of the person they
happen to be, but they fail to think of this person as themselves.2
What does it mean to think of oneself as oneself? Oedipus' thought "The murderer of Laius
must be found" is reﬂexive, in a basic sense: the person thinking and the person he thinks of are,
asamatteroffact,oneandthesame.Incomparisonwiththissimplereﬂexivity,thethoughtthatI
do not like camping trips is what we might call "super-reﬂexive".3 In this case, it is not just that
the subject of the thought is identical with its object. That very fact is also part of what I grasp in
having the thought. The thought is thus reﬂexive not just in being a relation of the form R(x,x), a
representation of person x by x herself, but in that the reﬂexive aspect itself is, somehow, also
reﬂected by the representation. I am aware, in other words, that the person being thought of is
noneotherthan the person on the other sideoftherelationofrepresentation, the person thinking
the thought. Put moreconcisely, when I think of myselfunder the I-concept,I think of myself as
the thinker (of this very thought).4 Someone like Oedipus is in a reﬂexive relation of represen-
tation to themselves. But someone who thinks "I am F" is somehow also aware of the reﬂexive
relation, and of the identity between the two relata, the subject and object of the representation.
Intuitively, this is the deﬁning feature of the I-concept.5 No way to think of oneself counts as an
I-concept if it fails to display this redoubled form of reﬂexivity, or super-reﬂexivity.6 Let us call
this the "Thinker Intuition".
1.2.
Plan
Since the Thinker Intuition captures the deﬁning feature of the I-concept, we should expect
any account of the way the I-concept presents us with its referent to do justice to this intui-
tion. The intuition can thus be used as a test to compare the merits of competing approaches,
based on how good they are at explaining it.
The classical way of capturing the Thinker Intuition is by construing the I-concept as an
indexical concept, a mental representation analogous to linguistic expressions such as "I",
"now", "here" or "today". The conventional meaning of the word "I", as used in a particular
utterance u, is something like "the person who utters u". Likewise, it is commonly argued,
someone who uses the I-concept as part of a particular thought t must be thinking of herself
under a description such as "the person who thinks t". This approach, however, raises some
well-known difﬁculties, brieﬂy discussed in Section 2.
The goal of this essay is to present an alternative way of ﬂeshing out the Thinker Intui-
tion, which I will call the phenomenal model. My approach, described in Section 3, rests on
two claims. The ﬁrst claim is that phenomenal concepts, and phenomenally grounded con-
cepts more generally, provide a good model for understanding the I-concept. Phenomenal
concepts are partly individuated by what I will call their phenomenal basis, namely the
phenomenal quality in which they are grounded. The second claim is that the phenomenal
basis distinctive of the I-concept is a generic form of cognitive phenomenology: the phe-
nomenology of intellection. Section 4 presents some of the advantages of the view and
Section 5 discusses some potential objections.
2.
The indexical model7
2.1.
Token-reﬂexive representations
The Thinker Intuition is the likely motivation behind a range of views according to which
the I-concept is an analogue, in the mental realm, to the word "I" in our linguistic practice.8
Thinking of Oneself as the Thinker
139

The word "I" belongs to the class of indexical expressions, like "you", "this", "here",
"now", "henceforth", etc. Indexicals determine their referent, on each occasion of utterance,
by exploiting contextual facts about that very utterance. Whenever an utterance u of the
word "I" is made, for instance, the conventional meaning conveyed is roughly "The
speaker of this utterance u of 'I'". In this description, the value of u is supplied by the
context, as the very utterance which also expresses the meaning under consideration.
More generally, the standing meaning of indexicals is captured by descriptions of a
special kind, like the italicised one above, which make reference to the utterances
(tokens) of the expressions themselves. For this reason, those expressions are sometimes
called "token-reﬂexives".9
On the indexical model of the I-concept, the same kind of token-reﬂexivity is made
use of in the mind as in speech. Where the word "I" exploits linguistic tokens, the
concept of self exploits mental tokens: occurrent thoughts. An utterance u of the word
"I" determines its referent as the object which happens to bear a certain contextual relation
to u (i.e. the relation "x is the speaker of u"). In a similar fashion, a tokening t of the I-
concept in a thought determines as its referent the individual bearing an analogous
relation to t, namely "x is the thinker of t". Furthermore, this token-reﬂexive reference
rule, according to the indexical model, is what we entertain in using the concept of
self. The cognitive signiﬁcance of the concept of self is identiﬁed with a special kind
of description: "being the thinker of this very thought", to simplify somewhat. This
does justice to the Thinker Intuition because it has the consequence that no one can
use the I-concept without thereby thinking of oneself, descriptively, as the person who
is thinking the present thought.
There is a complication, though. Early proponents of the token-reﬂexive approach
thought that what an indexical meant just was the token-reﬂexive description associated
with it. This had the unwanted consequence10 that a sentence such as (1) "I am saying
this" became synonymous with (1') "the person saying this is saying this". But (1') is
both a priori and necessarily true, while (1), although a priori true, is only contingently
so. Intuitively, the contrast is due to the fact that (1) is about a speciﬁc individual (who
might have said something else, or kept quiet), while (1') is about a condition ("being
the one who says this"), trivially fulﬁlled by whoever satisﬁes the predicate of the
sentence.
This modal dissonance led to a reﬁnement of the theory, inspired by a distinction due
to Kaplan (1989). (I do not mean to suggest in any way that Kaplan himself would
endorse the reﬁned indexical model of the I-concept, or any form of descriptivism
about indexicals, however sophisticated). According to Kaplan, the token-reﬂexive
description "being the speaker of u" that is conventionally attached to "I" is only one
aspect of its meaning, which he calls its "character" and distinguishes from its
"content". The character is only a rule for determining the content of the word in each
context (namely the actual person answering the description11); the rule is not itself the
content. Thus, a particular use u of the word "I" stands, not for a condition ("being the
speaker of u") but for a concrete individual (who satisﬁes the condition). And it stands
for that same individual in every possible world, so that the word refers rigidly, contrary
to ordinary descriptions.
The same should be said for the concept of self by advocates of an indexical approach.
To grasp the concept is to grasp the description "being the thinker of this very thought", and
thus to be possessed of a rule capable of determining a referent in any given context of
thought; but to apply it on a particular occasion is to refer to the individual answering to
the description in this instance, rather than to the condition expressed by the description.
140
Marie Guillot

2.2.
Some difﬁculties with the indexical model
The reﬁned indexical model blocks the modal objection, and some other issues raised by the
simple indexical model. However, the two variants equally invite a few further questions.
These have to do with the central (if different) role played by the token-reﬂexive description
"the thinker of this very thought" on either variant. Both versions, it should be noted, are
descriptivist approaches in some sense. Only the simple indexical model is descriptivist
in assuming that indexical representations have the same non-rigid semantic behaviour
as ordinary descriptions. However, both versions converge in identifying the cognitive sig-
niﬁcance of an indexical representation with a description. What the subject grasps, in
deploying the concept of self in her mind, is the token-reﬂexive description. On the
reﬁned indexical model, the description may be denied any truth-conditional relevance,
but the subject still needs to apprehend it as a route to the referent, a way to direct her
mind to the right object.
Identifying the cognitive import of the I-concept with the description "the thinker of this
very thought" raises several issues. A ﬁrst issue has to do with the "this" in "this very
thought". To think of "the thinker" is to think of oneself only if one thinks of the thinker
of a speciﬁc thought, namely this thought, the very thought through which one is represent-
ing the relevant individual. This raises the question of how the thought in question is made
reference to in the token-reﬂexive description. How does one latch onto the correct thought,
the present thought?12
Two main responses are likely to be made. One option is to say that the description "the
thinker of this very thought" contains another indexical representation, "this". This opens a
further question as to how this new layer of indexicality, in turn, is analysed. If this involves
a new token-reﬂexive description, the model needs to make clear how the risk of an inﬁnite
regress is to be avoided.
A second option is to claim that our present thoughts are just "given" to us in a special
way. It is plausible that conscious thoughts, at any rate, are thoughts we are aware of as
presently occurring. A natural way to account for this is to say that conscious thoughts
are phenomenally conscious13: there is something it is like to be having them, and it is
thanks to this phenomenal "mark" that we can focus on the right thought as it unfolds. I
do think that the distinctive phenomenology of conscious thoughts has a key role to play
in accounting for how the I-concept works. But, as will become clear in the next section,
I believe that this role can be captured in a simpler way than by making it an ingredient
of the indexical model. In any case, resorting to such a strategy would make the indexical
model a hybrid one. It would mean accepting that token-reﬂexive descriptions, by them-
selves, are not sufﬁcient to secure the super-reﬂexivity14 that characterises the concept of
self. I do not want to suggest that there is anything wrong with a hybrid model, but only
to point out an important, open question on which it is legitimate to expect an indexical
approach to say something substantive.
A distinct but related issue to be addressed has to do with a feature of the I-concept
which we might call its exclusivity. Although anyone can think about me, no one can
think of me in the way that I do when I use the I-concept. I am an object open to the
public gaze, but my self-conception is private. This is probably part of what Frege
(1918, 66) has in mind when he claims that "Every one is presented to himself in a
special and primitive way, in which he is presented to no one else." Now, in drawing its
inspiration from a linguistic model, the indexical approach makes it harder to account for
exclusivity. The conventional meaning of the word "I" - "the speaker of this utterance"
- is a description that can be grasped by anyone, speaker and hearers alike, and one that
Thinking of Oneself as the Thinker
141

all interlocutors can equally use as their route to the referent. In other words, when I say "I
don't like camping" and you understand what I say, we both think of me in the same way.
Transposing this model into the mental realm, as the indexical model of the I-concept does,
creates a tension with the exclusivity requirement.15 Suppose that to think of oneself as
oneself is to think of "the thinker of this thought". Why could someone else not think of
my present thought, and thus of the thinker of this particular thought, and in so doing
think of me in the same way that I do when I use the concept of self?
Of course, one might want to respond by insisting on an important disanalogy between
the linguistic and the mental cases. An utterance is a public object, produced for all to
experience; a thought token, by contrast, is an event that only the thinker can experience.
Others may think about my current thought, but it is not given to them as it is given to me, at
least when it is a conscious thought. And this might be grounds for arguing that in thinking
of "the thinker of this thought" I think of myself in a way that no one else can. But this
brings us back to the indexical model's need, evidenced by the earlier point, to rely on
the phenomenology of conscious thoughts16 and to say something substantial about this.
The indexical model raises a third, more worrying issue. The token-reﬂexive description
it identiﬁes as the cognitive signiﬁcance of the I-concept is a fairly complex conceptual rep-
resentation. One might object that this commits the approach to an implausible form of
intellectualism. A grasp of the I-concept, on this view, presupposes the prior grasp of
further, fairly abstract concepts, at least the concept of a thinker and the concept of a
thought; or, if one wants to paraphrase the token-reﬂexive description differently, concepts
of an equivalent level of generality. But it is unclear whether a small child who has just
come to master the I-concept, for instance, is also able to think of thoughts, or thinkers,
as such. While the previous two points suggest that the grasp of a token-reﬂexive descrip-
tion, per se, is not a sufﬁcient condition to grasp the I-concept, the present point suggests
that it may not be a necessary condition either.
3.
The phenomenal model
3.1.
Back to the thinker intuition
The indexical model may seem like a straightforward account of the Thinker Intuition - the
intuition that in using the concept of self, one thinks of oneself as the thinker of this very
thought. However, because of its descriptivist nature, the model raises some unresolved
issues, the most problematic of which might be its strong intellectualism.
I want to suggest an alternative new way to explain the Thinker Intuition. Mental
indexicality, if it does indeed exist, is not the only mental feature that connects us to our
present thinking, as such. I have alluded earlier to another, direct way in which we
become aware that we are currently thinking: by experiencing it. Our most basic grasp
of ourselves as thinkers is grounded in the phenomenology attached to conscious episodes
of thought, or what is often referred to as "cognitive phenomenology". The hypothesis I
want to put forward is that this phenomenology of thinking plays a more central role in
explaining how the I-concept works than has hitherto been acknowledged.
In the rest of this essay, I present the view that the concept of self is a phenomenal
concept, or at least a phenomenally grounded concept; and that the distinctive phenomenal
quality it is anchored in is a generic form of cognitive phenomenology, which I will call the
phenomenology of intellection.
Let me go in more detail over the main ingredients of this approach, which I will call the
"phenomenal model", before explaining how it accounts for the Thinker Intuition.
142
Marie Guillot

3.2.
Phenomenal concepts
The word "I" has traditionally been assumed to be an overt analogue to the concept of self,
and the best model for understanding it. I would like to suggest that a better model is to be
found in a very different kind of representation: phenomenal concepts.
Phenomenal concepts - for example, the concepts "greyish", "sweet-smelling" or
"painful" - are those we use to reﬂect on, classify and compare our experiences as such,
regardless of the objects they are experiences of. For example, when I concentrate on the
sensation of pain in my foot, as a sensation, rather than on the information about
damage in my foot's tissues that this sensation may convey, the concept I am using to cat-
egorise this pain - for example, as an itch, a throbbing or a burning pain or a cramp - typi-
cally is a phenomenal concept. Likewise when I introspect and reﬂect on the bright
hypnagogic lights dancing before my eyes after I have rubbed them, the unfamiliar taste
of cactus, or my feeling of gratefulness at the end of an illness.
Following Gertler (2012), I think of an experience as a special type of event: an
instantiation, in a subject, at a time, of a speciﬁc phenomenal property (which can
sometimes be a complex of simpler phenomenal properties, and can also have a multi-
modal origin, for instance when we have a uniﬁed experience of the taste, texture and
temperature of a piece of buttered toast). Phenomenal concepts are, then, those con-
cepts we use to reﬂect on the phenomenal properties whose instantiations constitute
our experiences.
Please note that none of this, or of what follows, entails any particular commitment
regarding the metaphysics of phenomenal properties. In particular, I wish to remain
neutral as to the relationship between the phenomenal properties instantiated by experi-
ences, and the physical properties of the objects of those experiences. Views on this
matter vary greatly, but it is widely accepted, across those views, that there is at any
rate "something it is like" to have an experience, a way it qualitatively affects our
state of awareness, a subjective impression marking its occurrence. It is also a matter
of wide agreement that one can focus on the manifest properties of the subjective
impression itself, the "what-it's-like-ness", as prima facie distinct from the properties
of the object that the experience is an experience of, whatever the relation between
the two domains might turn out to be. In what follows, the expression "phenomenal prop-
erties", then, is simply a way to latch on to the ﬁrst set of properties. Phenomenal prop-
erties in this non-committal sense are just aspects of our subjective impressions. In
keeping with established practice (see e.g. Levine 2001), I will talk (for instance) of "red-
dishness" to refer to that aspect of a visual impression I typically enjoy when I look at a
red rose, as opposed to a white one. To repeat, this manner of speaking does not reﬂect
any particular view on the nature of the "reddishness" of the experience, or on its
relationship with the redness of the rose.
While the general function of phenomenal concepts - to enable us to reﬂect on our
experiences as such - is clear, the details of how they work are disputed. As Papineau
(2008) notes, existing positions range from taking them to be a sui generis type of
concept (e.g. Chalmers 2003) to attempts at reductions to other kinds of concepts, including
recognitional concepts (Loar 1990), demonstrative concepts (Perry 2001) or quotational
concepts (Papineau 2008). However, one key feature is uncontroversial. Phenomenal con-
cepts are in some sense anchored in phenomenally conscious states of the subject. This
intuition can be made more precise from different angles.
First, one cannot acquire a given phenomenal concept without ﬁrst having the rel-
evant experience. Anosmics, who do not have the sense of smell, simply cannot think
Thinking of Oneself as the Thinker
143

of what it is like to smell roses under the phenomenal concept others typically use
(although they can, of course, refer to that experience in other ways, for instance
through a description, for example, as the experience produced in normal subjects by a
certain chemical compound).
Second, the relevant phenomenal experience appears to play a crucial role in the way
the concept, once acquired, works. The experience - the olfactory impression as of roses
or the itchy sensation, for instance - is used as a "label" or "template" to categorise the
experience itself, and further encounters with experiences of the same kind. We ﬁx our
mind's eye, so to speak, on a piece of phenomenology - a reddish shade, or a particular
itchiness, for instance - and think, it is this hue, this unpleasant sensation, where this is
not a matter of ﬁling them under a particular description, or just mentally "pointing" at
them, but of isolating the relevant phenomenal properties through their own instantiation,
in something like the way we pin down a particular shade of red paint by looking at a
little square of that very paint in the manufacturer's catalogue. As some17 put it, the experi-
ence serves as its own mode of presentation. Or, as Chalmers (2003, 235) says: "The clear-
est cases of direct phenomenal concepts arise when a subject attends to the quality of an
experience, and forms a concept wholly based on the attention to the quality, 'taking up'
the quality into the concept."18
In other words, the conceptual representation of a particular experience is partly consti-
tuted by the experience itself. A phenomenal concept, we may say, works by sampling. The
relation between the concept and the experience it represents involves an exempliﬁcation of
that very experience.
I propose to call the experience that a given phenomenal concept "samples", and thus
enables us to refer to, the phenomenal basis of that concept. It is the phenomenal property
that one needs to be acquainted with in order to acquire a speciﬁc phenomenal concept, and
that partly constitutes that concept. The phenomenal concept "itchy", for example, has as its
phenomenal basis a particular somatosensory feeling, the feeling of itchiness. The phenom-
enal concepts "rose-scented", "painful" or "elated" have as their respective phenomenal
bases a sensory phenomenal property, an algedonic phenomenal property and an emotional
phenomenal property. Phenomenal concepts are individuated in part by their phenomenal
bases.
3.3.
The phenomenology of intellection
One particular kind of phenomenology which is enjoying increasing attention is the phe-
nomenology of conscious thinking. There is something it is like, not just to have perceptual
experiences, feelings of pain and pleasure, or emotions, but also to have thoughts passing
through one's mind. Conscious episodes of using our conceptual capacities, be it in making
judgments or forming hypotheses, being struck by a doubt, entertaining a possibility, reach-
ing certainty about some proposition or coming to reject it, all register in a certain way in
our stream of consciousness. This is what is often called "cognitive phenomenology"
(Bayne and Montague 2011).
Here, I would like to focus on the most generic form of this kind of phenomenology. To
explain what I have in mind, it is worth mentioning a couple of terminological ambiguities
attached to the expression "cognitive phenomenology".
The ﬁrst way in which the kind of cognitive phenomenology I am interested in is
generic concerns the attitudinal level. The idea that conscious thoughts are marked by a
characteristic phenomenology is often spelled out by way of a contrast with perceptual
(and sometimes algedonic or affective) attitudes. This is how Pitt puts it:
144
Marie Guillot

( . . . ) conscious thoughts can't be identiﬁed with any other sort of conscious states ( . . . ).
Thoughts are states of a different kind from all others. Hence, there must be a proprietary phe-
nomenology of cognition - ( . . . ) a phenomenology that makes a state cognitive, as opposed to
visual, auditory, olfactory, somatic, proprioceptive, etc. (Pitt 2011:145; my emphasis.)
The words "cognition" and "thought", though, are ambiguous. Cognition can be a matter of
getting to know, and hence forming beliefs; or it can simply be a matter of processing infor-
mation, without treating it as true or false. Similarly, as Kriegel (2015) remarks, we can be
said to have a thought when we think that something is the case, but also when we merely
think about it, in what can be a wholly neutral way, as when we just consider whether some-
thing is the case or not, or remain indifferent to it (Kriegel 2015, 116 sq.) A thought can be
an occurrent attitude that has assertoric force, like a judgement that p or (in the case of a
negative force) a rejection of p. But it can also be the mere contemplation of the proposition
that p, which is non-committal as to its truth or falsity.
That thinking-that, that is, judging (or denying) that p, comes with a characteristic
"feel", has long been observed. Hume, for instance, famously claimed that
( . . . ) belief consists merely in a certain feeling or sentiment ( . . . ). When we are convinced of
any matter of fact, we do nothing but conceive it, along with a certain feeling, different from
what attends the mere reveries of the imagination. (Hume [1739] 1896, Appendix, 624)
However, thinking in the neutral sense of merely entertaining or grasping a proposition p
also has a certain phenomenological signature.19 I can be conscious and alert while my
mind is wandering, while I muse and aimlessly toy with ideas; or while I concentrate on
a question I have not yet made up my mind about, pondering whether to answer it in the
positive or the negative. And it feels a certain way to be in those non-committal states.
While this experience might be more tenuous and elusive than when we judge or deny
(or doubt or hypothesise), it is nonetheless present. I would like to suggest that we view
the experience as registering our understanding of the meaning of a certain proposition
that we are currently holding in our mind: as a feeling of "semantic uptake" or of pure
intellection. This way of considering the phenomenology of thinking-about might help
explain why it is harder to characterise, and perhaps to focus on, than the phenomenology
of thinking-that. To judge or doubt or hypothesise that p requires that we ﬁrst grasp the
meaning of p. So the phenomenology of intellection, on this approach, is present when-
ever we engage in any kind of conscious intellectual activity, and forms a sort of baseline
in the symphony of our cognitive life. It is present on its own when we are merely con-
templating a proposition, but it is also an ingredient of the more complex phenomenal
states involved in judging, doubting or denying. If this is correct, then the very ubiquity
of the phenomenology characteristic of entertaining a proposition is what makes it harder
to describe.
To mark the contrast between those two senses of the notion of cognitive phenomenol-
ogy, assertoric vs. neutral, I will use the expression "phenomenology of intellection"20 to
talk about the latter. I will assume here that the phenomenology of intellection, in this
sense, is present in every conscious episode of conceptual mentation, across all the attitudes
of judging, doubting, denying, contemplating, etc. It is this attitudinally generic phenomen-
ology of intellection that I want to focus on.
The second sense in which the notion I want to isolate is generic has to do with content.
Writers who accept the existence of cognitive phenomenology generally agree that it comes
in different shades, depending on the kind of attitude involved. But some think that it is
Thinking of Oneself as the Thinker
145

further speciﬁed by the kind of content entertained under a given attitude. To quote Pitt
again:
In addition to arguing that there is something it is like to think a conscious thought, I shall also
argue that what it is like to think a conscious thought is distinct from what it is like to be in any
other kind of conscious mental state, and that what it is like to think the conscious thought that p
is distinct from what it is like to think any other conscious thought ( . . . ). (Pitt 2004, 2)
This ﬁnal claim, however, is not accepted by all advocates of cognitive phenomenology
(see e.g. Chudnoff, 2015). I will remain neutral as to whether different types of prop-
ositional content give rise to different kinds of phenomenal signatures, more ﬁne-grained
than the kinds typiﬁed by the attitudes. Both sides of this in-house debate are at least com-
mitted to a "generic" cognitive phenomenology for each attitude A, whether they construe it
as all the cognitive phenomenology there is for A, or as a phenomenal property that all the
more ﬁne-grained experiences associated with grasping different propositions p, q, etc.
under A have in common. What interests me is the phenomenology of the basic attitude
of intellection, considered at this generic level.
3.4.
The phenomenal model: ﬁrst pass
Putting together the notion of a phenomenal concept, and the notion of a generic phenom-
enology of intellection, I would like to suggest a new way in which we might understand the
concept of self.21
Phenomenal concepts, as noted earlier, are partly individuated by their distinctive
phenomenal basis. Now, suppose that I am right in saying that there is a basic experience
of intellection present in any conscious thinking - as part of a phenomenal complex in the
case of a judgement that p or a suspicion that p or a supposition that p, or on its own in the
case where we merely entertain the proposition that p. If this experience exists, then it is
available as a potential phenomenal basis for the formation of a phenomenal concept in
its own right, just like any other phenomenal quality. It is plausible that this concept
does indeed exist, and I would like to contemplate the possibility, at a ﬁrst pass, that it is
the I-concept.
The idea, then, is that the phenomenology of intellection constitutes the phenomenal
basis of the concept of self,22 just like phenomenal reddishness, sourness or itchiness con-
stitute the respective phenomenal bases of the phenomenal concepts reddish, sour and itchy.
I think of phenomenal sourness by experiencing what it is like to taste the sour; similarly,
the suggestion here is that I think of myself, under the I-concept, by experiencing what it is
like to be the thinker. In addition, the I-concept works like a phenomenal concept, by
exempliﬁcation.
This simple way of generalising the phenomenal-concept model to the I-concept seems
to capture quite nicely the Thinker Intuition. To think of oneself as oneself, remember, is to
think of oneself as the thinker of this very thought. An awareness of our present mental
activity is thus key to the required form of super-reﬂexivity. There is no better way to
achieve this than by exploiting the way that our present thinking is manifested to us as it
unfolds: namely, through the phenomenology of intellection. What is important here is
that, since we are talking about a phenomenal form of awareness, the phenomenology of
intellection is a direct way that our own thinking is given to us; and a way in which it is
given to us as present.23 Moreover, since it is the proprietary phenomenology of intellec-
tion, that is, what marks it apart from other forms of conscious mentation (vision, audition,
146
Marie Guillot

proprioception, affect, etc.), it is a way in which our own thinking is given to us as a think-
ing. Those features can anchor one's conception of oneself in one's occurrent thinking, as
such, in a way that the indexical approach, on its own, does not explain. In addition, the
phenomenal-concept approach has the consequence that mastering the I-concept is only
a matter of attending to the experience of intellection and "taking it up" into the concept,
instead of having to feed it into a complex token-reﬂexive description, as a hybrid indexical
model would require. This is a much simpler alternative view, and one that does not pre-
suppose further conceptual capacities or an implausibly high level of abstraction.
One objection immediately springs to mind, though. Does this simple extension of the
phenomenal-concept model to the I-concept not select the wrong type of entity as its refer-
ent? The self-concept refers to an individual, namely a self, rather than a property. So how
can the model of ordinary phenomenal concepts, which are representations of properties, be
appropriate in this case? When I think of myself as myself, the objection might go, I think of
myself as the thinker, not as the thinking. Crucial though it may be to think of myself
through the experience of thinking, it is not the same thing as identifying myself with
that experience alone. But this is what I would do on the "sampling" model of reference
distinctive of phenomenal concepts.
Let us call this the "wrong-kind-of-entity objection". Several kinds of responses to the
objection are possible. One route, the semantic route, would consist in viewing the I-
concept as something like a metonymic concept, enabling us to refer to a whole (the
subject) via reference to a part of it (her experience of thinking).24 Another route, the meta-
physical route,25 would start from the observation that the metaphysics of selves is very far
from being a settled matter. That the self is not a property is not something we can just take
for granted. Several strong accounts exist that do picture the self as a property-like entity: a
set of properties (Parﬁt 1984), a "dimension of experience" or experiential property (Zahavi
2005), or a capacity or set of capacities (Dainton 2008). One could, alternatively, accept that
the self is an individual rather than a property, while noting that several kinds of entities
count as individuals: things, but also events and processes. Why rule out that the self, a
dynamic entity, might turn out to be an individual process like thinking, rather than a
thing on the model of rocks and houses? I explore these and other possible responses, meta-
physical as well as semantic, elsewhere (Guillot 2012). Here, however, for the sake of sim-
plicity and space, I will present just one possible answer which turns on a revision, or rather
a generalisation, of the phenomenal model.
3.5.
The phenomenal model: second pass
The wrong-kind-of-entity objection suggests that simply extending the phenomenal-
concept model to the case of the I-concept might not be a straightforward matter. What
we need is a model for analysing the I-concept as the concept of the seat or source of
the present experience of intellection, rather than as a concept of this experience itself.
However, I think that the basic inspiration behind the phenomenal-concept model can
and should be retained. The intuition that the concept of self is in some way grounded in
the phenomenology of intellection is, for the reasons mentioned above, one that seems
worth exploring further. The phenomenology of intellection gives the subject a direct
grasp of her occurrent thinking, as present and as a thinking; these are all desirable features
in an account of the Thinker Intuition, as we have seen. Could it be, then, that the concept of
self is a phenomenally grounded concept of a slightly different kind than phenomenal con-
cepts stricto sensu?
Thinking of Oneself as the Thinker
147

Phenomenal concepts are not the only kind of phenomenally grounded concepts. What I
call phenomenally grounded concepts are those concepts which are partly individuated by
phenomenal experiences. As a consequence, one cannot grasp or acquire those concepts
without having had the relevant kind of experience. Phenomenal concepts are phenomen-
ally grounded concepts in this sense, since they refer by "sampling" an experience, and thus
presuppose an exposure to the experience in question. And they are, as noted above, partly
individuated by that experience, as their phenomenal basis.
Another type of phenomenally grounded concept, however, could provide a better
model for the I-concept. We can use phenomenal experiences to refer to those experiences
themselves (as we do with phenomenal concepts); but we can also use them to refer to the
cause or source of the experiences. This is what we do with a particular kind of empirical
concepts, which I will call phenomenal-appearance concepts, and which have recently
attracted (under other names) the attention of a number of philosophers, including Dahlgru¨n
(2010), and especially Papineau (2008) and Gertler (2012). Phenomenal-appearance con-
cepts are concepts of empirical objects classiﬁed on the basis of how they phenomenally
appear to us. Take the ﬁrst time I saw a panda in the zoo. I registered its peculiar appearance,
the pattern of black and white patches, the round cub-like head, the ponderous gait, etc. In
doing this, I found myself in a position to acquire a new phenomenal-appearance concept,
the concept panda. It is a concept for pandas that categorises them based on the typical
"panda-look", the distinctive phenotype of a panda.26 The phenomenal impression I
received on this ﬁrst encounter was stored as a kind of "template"; and whenever this tem-
plate is reactivated, when I perceive or imagine a panda for instance, the new object is ﬁled
under the same concept. It is through this phenomenal-appearance concept that I usually
refer to pandas, although I could also use other sorts of concepts, for instance a descriptive
taxonomic concept, like that of a black-and-white, bamboo-eating subspecies of the ursidea
family.
Note that the phenomenal character of my impression of pandas plays a constitutive role
in the way my phenomenal-appearance concept panda works. A given use of the concept
will typically involve a panda-like phenomenal impression, and will refer to whatever
happens to be causing this impression. As Gertler (2012) puts it, the referent of (what I
call) a phenomenal-appearance concept is "the object whose presence and properties cau-
sally contribute (in an appropriate way) to the relevant aspect of how things seem to the
subject", that is, to the activation of the phenomenal template that was set up on the ﬁrst
encounter with the object. As Gertler notes, the concept thus represents its referent in
much the same way that a photograph represents its subject: through the impression left
on the photographic paper, we refer to the real object which happens to be the causal
source of the impression27 (cf. Evans 1982, Ch. 3.4).
This mode of reference means that phenomenal-appearance concepts belong to the
family of phenomenally grounded concepts, because the object targeted by a given use
of such a concept is determined via a relation to a phenomenal impression (i.e. it is selected
as the cause or origin of that impression). As a result, the reference-rule that individuates the
concept cannot be spelled out without making reference to this piece of phenomenology. In
addition, the subject cannot grasp or acquire such a concept (for instance the concept
panda) without having had the relevant phenomenal impression. So phenomenal-appear-
ance concepts, like phenomenal concepts, are partly individuated by a certain experience
(e.g. the panda-like experience for the concept panda): they, too, have a distinctive phenom-
enal basis.
This suggests a possible way to understand the I-concept. I propose, at a second pass,
that the concept of self is a phenomenal-appearance concept whose distinctive phenomenal
148
Marie Guillot

basis is the phenomenology of intellection. When I use the concept of self, I use the experi-
ence in which my present thinking is manifested to refer, not to that experience itself, but to
the source of that experience: namely myself, the thinker.28
It is important to note that this generalised phenomenal model is in no way a descriptive
model. When I use a phenomenal-appearance concept, I refer to whatever is the source of
this, where "this" is the experience that constitutes the phenomenal basis of the concept. But
I do not represent the italicised relation itself; I represent through that relation. The photo-
graphic model mentioned earlier makes this clear. A photographic portrait enables me to
mentally refer to the person who posed for the portrait and caused the appearance ﬁxed
on the paper, without requiring that I think descriptively of them as "the person who
caused this"; intuitively, the person is simply presented to me through the photographic
appearance. The same is true of the phenomenal-appearance concept panda: causing the
relevant panda-like experience in me is a way for the referent, an actual panda, to be pre-
sented to me. And so it is, if I am correct, for the concept of self. I use the phenomenology of
intellection attached to my present thought to think of the person who is the source of this
thought, but this does not involve grasping the italicised relation in the form of a descrip-
tion; in being receptive to the phenomenology, I am presented with the person in question.
This, then, is the new approach to the concept of self I want to put on the table. The I-
concept is a kind of phenomenally grounded concept, more speciﬁcally a phenomenal-
appearance concept, whose distinctive phenomenal basis is the phenomenology of
intellection.
4.
Virtues of the phenomenal model
One clear virtue of the revised phenomenal model is that it accounts well for the Thinker
Intuition. If my approach is correct, then in using the I-concept, I cannot fail to be thinking
of the thinker of this very thought, since the concept is designed to refer to the source of the
present thinking. Furthermore, it does so through the direct phenomenal manifestation of
that thinking. This enables the phenomenal model to explain The Thinker Intuition more
fully, more economically and more plausibly than the indexical model does.
More fully, because the phenomenal model provides a good answer to a central question
left open by the indexical approach. To think of oneself as oneself, as I remarked above, it is
not enough to think of "the thinker"; one needs to think of the thinker of a very speciﬁc
thought, namely the present thought. To think of thinking in general, or of any random
thought, obviously does not sufﬁce to secure the required super-reﬂexivity. But what is
more, to think of the thinker of what happens to be the present thought is also insufﬁcient:
this would merely provide simple reﬂexivity if one did not realise that the thought at issue is
the very thought now unfolding. Super-reﬂexivity obtains only when one thinks of the
thinker of the present thought, apprehended as the present thought. Only then is the identity
between the object and the subject of the relation of representation reﬂected in the represen-
tation itself.
The phenomenal approach explains how, in using the I-concept, we latch onto the
correct thought and recognise it as such. On this approach, a subject's self-conception is
anchored in the phenomenology of intellection, through which her thinking is manifested
to her as it unfolds. Phenomenology in general has a "presentational" dimension29: it typi-
cally makes us aware of what is present, here and now, and it makes us aware of it as
present: it presents us with it. This is most obvious in the case of perceptual phenomenol-
ogy. When I notice a sweet smell as of roses, it is usually a way to become aware of the
roses, or rose-scented objects, that are here at hand; more importantly, the olfactory
Thinking of Oneself as the Thinker
149

impression is, so to speak, "present before my consciousness" in a way that also makes me
aware of those objects as present. The same goes for any kind of phenomenology, and the
phenomenology of intellection in particular is a way for us to be aware of our current think-
ing as the present thinking. This gives a full account of super-reﬂexivity where the indexical
model, per se, arguably falls short. As we have seen in Section 2, to say that the meaning of
the I-concept is captured by the token-reﬂexive description "the thinker of this very
thought" is not yet to explain in what way reference is made to the thought in question
in the description, such that the subject would recognise it as the present thought.
The phenomenal-model account of the Thinker Intuition is also likely to be more
economical than the indexical account. As I argued in Section 2, a proponent of the
indexical model may want to appeal to the phenomenology of conscious thoughts to
answer the above question (how the present thought is made reference to in the descrip-
tion "the thinker of this very thought"). This means adopting a hybrid account. The
account I propose is simpler: it starts from the phenomenology that the indexical
model might ultimately need to invoke in any case, and builds a model for the I-
concept from there, tapping the intuition that the concept's anchoring into the character-
istic experience of conscious thinking is essential to the way it works, and ﬂeshing out
the intuition by using the model of phenomenally grounded concepts. Once the impor-
tance of the phenomenology is recognised, it is not clear whether the descriptive appar-
atus added by the indexical approach casts any further light. Why not, then, adopt the
simpler approach I favour?
A further reason to do so is that it provides an account of the Thinker Intuition that
has greater prima facie psychological plausibility than the indexical model. This is
because the phenomenal model is a much less intellectualist option. In order to
master the I-concept, the indexical model requires that the subject be able to grasp a
complex description; on the phenomenal model, she only needs to be receptive to an
experience. Phenomenal-appearance concepts, to which my view likens the I-concepts,
are a relatively basic piece of cognitive equipment, and require little capacity for
abstraction. Categorising objects on the basis of the way they phenomenally appear
to us is plausibly one of the simpler forms of conceptualisation, one we can practice
while still immersed in experience. To refer to herself through a concept of this kind,
the subject must be responsive to a certain impression; but she does not need to
possess further concepts, a fortiori highly abstract concepts such as that of a
"thought" or of a "thinker", as she does on the indexical model. Of course, it might
turn out that the mastery of the I-concept really is a competence of the level of sophis-
tication implied by the indexical model. But the fact that there is at least greater prima
facie psychological plausibility in the competing approach is a reason to prefer it, unless
and until proponents of the indexical approach give arguments supporting a more cog-
nitively demanding mechanism.
A further virtue of the phenomenal model is that it accounts for the epistemic exclusiv-
ity attaching to the concept of self.30 If my capacity to think of myself as myself is rooted in
a particular aspect of my phenomenology, it will be accessible to me alone, as are phenom-
enal states in general. Someone else, in order to think about me, will need to employ a
different kind of representation. If they use the phenomenology of intellection that they
have access to - their own - as the basis for deploying a phenomenal-appearance
concept, this will result in their thinking about the source of this experience of intellection,
namely themselves, rather than me. Thus, anyone (who has the required conceptual abil-
ities) can use the I-concept to think of themselves, and anyone can think of me, NN; but
150
Marie Guillot

only I can use the I-concept to think of NN. These predictions of the phenomenal model
coincide with the intuition of exclusivity.
The phenomenal model may additionally cast some light on the characteristic referential
behaviour of the I-concept. This is something I explore in detail elsewhere (Guillot 2013),
so I will only mention a few points very brieﬂy here, to indicate the way in which the
account proceeds.
First, construing the I-concept as a phenomenally grounded concept correctly pre-
dicts the phenomenon of "guaranteed reference" Anscombe (1975) ﬁrst described. If,
in using the I-concept, I refer to the source of the present thinking through the phenom-
enal manifestation of this thinking, then it is impossible for a use of the concept not to
secure a reference: where there is thinking, there is a source to that thinking.
Second, it has long been observed that, at least in its core uses,31 the I-concept cannot
fail to fasten onto the correct object: it is, in those cases, immune not just to empty reference
but also to mis-reference. On my approach, this is a consequence of the way the referent is
selected. Phenomenal-appearance concepts are designed to target whatever object happens
to be the causal origin of a certain phenomenal appearance. As pointed out earlier in the
discussion of the photograph analogy, there is no need for an independent epistemic
route to that object, other than the phenomenal appearance itself, since this appearance is
a way for the object to be manifested. This removes a possible source of error, and explains
why the I-concept cannot latch onto something that is not in fact the origin of the current
thinking. And whatever system produces my thinking, intuitively, is me. (See Dainton
2008; Peacocke 2014). So, at least in its core uses, the I-concept is guaranteed to refer to
the right object.32
This last point gives me an opportunity to highlight both a connection and a degree of
contrast between my proposal and some neo-Fregean approaches, in particular the inﬂuen-
tial view of Evans (1982, Ch. 7).33 Evans points out that a subject has at her disposal dedi-
cated "information channels" through which she can learn about herself speciﬁcally:
proprioception, kinaesthesia, pain detection and all the other ways of gaining information
that form part of inner perception. To think of oneself as oneself, according to Evans, is
to refer to the object one accesses via those dedicated information channels, and to do so
in such a way that the thought is informed by those channels, sensitive to the information
they yield. One point to note is that the only person I can get to know about by exploiting
those dedicated epistemic routes happens to be me (kinaesthesia, for instance, only informs
me about my movements). Thus, on Evans's approach, there is no risk of mis-reference
when one uses the I-concept so analysed.
Now, my view belongs to a broadly Evansian tradition insofar as it also treats the I-
concept as grounded in an experience of the self. However, the central role that my proposal
ascribes to the phenomenological dimension arguably gives it an advantage when it comes
to accounting for immunity to mis-reference. Evans's explanation is couched in function-
alist terms: the I-concept tracks the inputs entering a speciﬁc circuitry (the mechanisms
of proprioception, kinesthesia, etc.). As a matter of cognitive design, these inputs always
come from the same person: me. Always, that is, if things are working properly. But
deviant causal chains are not in principle ruled out: it could be that the systems through
which I usually detect my own movement, posture, balance or temperature (etc.) gets
rerouted so as to take inputs from another person's body.34 If that happened, my self-con-
ception would track a person other than me, giving rise to a form of mis-reference. This
means that the form of immunity to mis-reference secured by Evans's view is a conditional
one, dependent on an assumption of normality.35 Intuitively, however, the I-concept (in its
core uses) is absolutely immune to mis-reference: it does not make sense (other than
Thinking of Oneself as the Thinker
151

metaphorically) to say that I could be thinking of another person as myself, as long, at least,
as the object is only referred to through the I-concept.36 My approach may be better
equipped to account for this stronger guarantee. On the phenomenal model, the I-concept
refers to the causal source of the experience of intellection. But whatever that source is,
that must be me: it seems something close to an a priori truth that only I can have my
experiences, so whatever is the seat of my experiences is me, without any room left for a
substitution of identities.
5.
Some objections
The discussion of the last section, of course, does not cover all the features that make the
concept of self puzzling and interesting - very far from it. Such is not the aim here,
however; the goal of this essay is only to show that the phenomenal model offers a
viable and attractive new approach to the I-concept, which offers a convincing account
of its central feature, the super-reﬂexivity captured by the Thinker Intuition. This, I
think, is sufﬁcient reason to believe that the model is worth exploring further.
Before concluding, I would like to consider a few objections. Let me ﬁrst put aside some
potential misunderstandings. It will perhaps be objected that my approach is still fairly intel-
lectualist, in contending that we think about ourselves, as ourselves, essentially as thinking
subjects. Is it not more essential to the sort of entity we are that we enjoy free agency, say, or
that we are capable of emotions and of recognising values, or that we belong to a certain
animal species (etc.)?
This sort of objection, I think, would be misguided. Please note that I make no meta-
physical claim about the nature of selves here; the view only concerns the I-concept as a
representation, and the mechanism through which it enables us to self-refer. I stressed at
the very start the difference between the philosophical concept of self that is used by the-
orists to reﬂect on the nature of selfhood, on the one hand, and the ordinary, non-theoretical
self-concept you and I use in our daily lives to pick out a speciﬁc individual - ourselves -
among all others. There is no particular reason to expect that this device used for pinpoint-
ing someone reveals very much about the deﬁning metaphysical traits of selves in general.
Moreover, that we use the experience attached to our present thinking to self-refer does
not prevent us from thinking that many things are true of us, other than that we think. The
concept of self is just a way to mark oneself out, and to have a repository to collate infor-
mation about oneself; but what this information consists in is an independent matter. The I-
concept, however it manages to refer, can be used to predicate a lot of things of oneself - to
think of oneself, for instance, as an agent, a subject of emotions, a living animal, a faithful
friend, a worried father, someone who is late ﬁling their tax-report, etc. To view the I-
concept as grounded in the phenomenology of intellection is not to say that our quality
as thinkers should necessarily take up much of the scope of our self-conception.
Finally, the concept of self is not the only way in which we represent ourselves. There
are many non-conceptual ways in which we do so, for instance through basic bodily aware-
ness, via the distinctive experiences of proprioception, kinaesthesia, pain sensation, etc.
What this essay attempts to do is not to capture all the ways, or maybe even the most funda-
mental ways, in which we apprehend ourselves as ourselves. It has the much more limited
aim of capturing the concept that enables us to represent ourselves conceptually.
Still, one might not be content with my observation above that, however my I-concept
refers, nothing stops me from using it to predicate any number of things of myself, includ-
ing physical, biological or social attributes, in addition to intellectual ones. Exactly how, it
might be asked,37 do subjects manage to make such rich and heterogeneous predications
152
Marie Guillot

with a concept that corresponds to such a narrow way to think of oneself? If the I-concept
builds on a way of being presented to oneself that is as minimal as I claim - if it is built, that
is, on one's manifestation to oneself as the thinker of the present thought - does it give us
the necessary resources to judge, for example, "I am left-handed" or "I have a sore throat"
or "I have just won the lottery" or even "I am NN"?
It is important to note that the question arises for other accounts of the I-concept, includ-
ing the indexical model. Even the Evansian approach, which grounds the I-concept in a
broad range of dedicated ways of knowing about oneself, needs to be supplemented to
explain how we come to self-attribute features of which we can learn only through
"third-person", as opposed to self-speciﬁc, ways of acquiring information (such as
reading in the newspaper that NN has won the lottery).
Now, here is one possible way in which this kind of predication might work on the
phenomenal model. It is helpful here to follow Papineau (2008) in thinking of phenomenal
concepts (and, I would add, phenomenally grounded concepts more generally) not just as
representations whose typical uses exploit a certain phenomenal template. One can also
consider the body of information which comes to be stored under a phenomenal concept
over the course of its use. As a repository for this body of data, the concept functions as
a sort of "ﬁle", or dossier.38 For instance, the ﬁle attached with my phenomenal-appearance
concept "panda" contains various attributes such as "is black and white", "eats bamboo",
"sleeps for most of the day", "climbs trees", etc. Following Recanati (2012), let us
suppose that the I-concept, too, is associated with a ﬁle of its own.39
But, as noted above, other types of representations share their referent with the I-
concept: various cognitive systems, such as kinaesthesia, proprioception, etc., have the
function to track information about the same individual, namely me. It is plausible that
the representations of the subject used by each of those systems are also associated with
speciﬁc repositories of information, or ﬁles. Recanati (2012, Ch. 4) argues that different
ﬁles about the same object can come to be "linked" when the subject realises that they
co-refer. According to him, this is just what happens when we make a judgement of identity,
such as "Cicero is Tully". As a result of the operation of "linking", information can ﬂow
freely between the two original ﬁles. This may be just what happens between the various
specialised ﬁles in which a subject collects information about herself. In the early stages
of a subject's cognitive development, she comes to learn that the individual named NN
is none other than the individual who suffers growth pains, who has bad dreams, who is
hungry, who runs a temperature, who is presently thinking, etc. In this way, physical, bio-
logical and social information can get ﬁled under the I-concept, even if it originates from a
different ﬁle. The I-concept, while grounded in the phenomenology of intellection, is thus
apt to serve as a repository of data from heterogeneous sources. The details of how we learn
to coordinate the relevant ﬁles - how we become aware, for instance, that our hearing self
and our moving self and our thinking self are one and the same individual - is an empirical
question, not unlike that of how multimodal binding happens in perception, and it falls to
developmental psychologists to address it. I hope that the suggestion of the general form
such an explanation might take in a mental-ﬁle framework sufﬁces, at any rate, to alleviate
the worry regarding the use of the I-concept in predications of non-intellectual attributes.
A different objection could be raised on the grounds, not that the phenomenal model is
too intellectualist, but that it makes essential use of intellectual phenomenology. If thinking
of oneself under the I-concept involves an experience attaching to one's conscious thoughts,
does that imply that one cannot think of oneself as oneself unconsciously? Although several
kinds of replies are possible here, the one I ﬁnd most convincing consists in distinguishing
between different uses that phenomenally grounded concepts can be put to.
Thinking of Oneself as the Thinker
153

Let me note ﬁrst that the objection echoes one that is often raised against accounts of
phenomenal concepts as grounded in conscious experiences. If the phenomenal concept
"reddish", say, is partly individuated by the experience of reddishness, does it mean that I
cannot use it when unconscious? A standard response consists in saying that, while the
acquisition of a phenomenal concept requires an actual experience of reddishness, the
concept is retained beyond the duration of the experience, and apt to evolve into a
stable successor concept that can be re-used even in the absence of a similar experience.
This is what Chalmers (2003) calls "standing phenomenal concepts" (to distinguish them
from his "direct phenomenal concepts"), or what Papineau (2008, Section 3.5) calls "phe-
nomenally derived concepts". According to Papineau, as noted above, the phenomenal
template with which the concept originates (what I call its phenomenal basis) comes to
be associated with a "ﬁle" in which the information falling under the concept is stored.
Once in existence, the ﬁle itself can be used to form further attitudes, whether or not
the associated experience is presently active. Even in its "derivative" uses, though, the
concept still counts as a phenomenally grounded concept, since the ﬁle is partly individ-
uated by the originating experience, insofar as its historical-causal conditions of emer-
gence plays a decisive role in making it the concept that it is. A similar reasoning can
be applied, beyond the case of pure phenomenal concepts, to the case of phenomenally
grounded concepts in general. The details of how "derivative" or "standing" uses of
such concepts are related to their "core" or "direct" uses can be ﬂeshed out in different
ways, and much more needs to be said on the issue; this would, however, be a task for
a separate essay. What matters for now is the general idea that a concept being phenom-
enally grounded, and in particular requiring for its acquisition an exposure to the experi-
ence that constitutes its phenomenal basis, does not imply that each and every subsequent
use of the concept depends on a fresh instantiation of the experience. Unconscious as well
as conscious tokenings of the concept of self are thus in principle compatible with the
phenomenal model.
A related issue concerns those systems that are unconscious not just some of the
time, as we are, but all the time. Should it not be possible for information-processing
structures which are devoid of any phenomenology, such as machines and zombies,
to self-refer? The reply made to the previous point cannot be extended to this one,
since those systems have no conscious experiences that a concept could get grounded
in to start with, thus excluding a fortiori any possibility of "derivative" uses of such
concepts.
My response here is to point out the pluralism in the domain of reﬂexive represen-
tations. While a machine can certainly self-refer, there is no compelling reason to
believe that the representation mobilised to that effect is identical to our concept of
self. Many things self-refer - for instance the bottle of potion in Alice in Wonderland,
with its label "Drink me" - without warranting the attribution of the same I-concept
that we possess. It seems quite plausible that a device of self-reference in a machine,
for instance, could secure self-reference, and even necessary self-reference, while still
falling short of super-reﬂexivity. A symbol in a computer can certainly stand for the
computer itself (the little hard-drive icon on the computer's desktop is one example),
thus equipping it with simple reﬂexivity; further, the machine can be set up so that the
symbol only tracks changes in the machine itself, thus making the reﬂexivity necess-
ary rather than (as in the case of Oedipus) accidental. Yet does this amount to the
system being aware of the relation of reﬂexivity itself? Much more would have to
be said about the case to evidence a true likeness to what a subject does with her
concept of self.
154
Marie Guillot

6.
Conclusion
I have argued that the super-reﬂexivity that distinguishes the concept of self is captured by
the "Thinker Intuition" - the intuition that in thinking of herself as herself, a subject ident-
iﬁes both relata of the relation of representation as one and the same object, thus thinking of
herself as the thinker of this very thought. As I hope to have shown, this intuition can be
successfully accounted for by construing the concept of self as a phenomenally grounded
concept, more speciﬁcally a phenomenal-appearance concept, anchored in the phenomen-
ology that makes one's present thinking manifest as such: the phenomenology of intellec-
tion. The account is economical and has psychological plausibility, avoiding in particular
the strong intellectualism of the indexical approach. It also opens up promising new
ways of explaining additional features of the I-concept, including guaranteed reference
and the immunity to mis-reference. Much more will need be said about those points in
future work, and it is also possible, of course, that the details of the approach are not
quite right. But I hope to have made at least a convincing case for the need to understand
the concept of self as much more deeply rooted in the phenomenology of intellection, and
phenomenology generally, than has been acknowledged so far. No doubt there is much
room for improvement of the model and further exploration of its implications. The aim
of this essay, though, will have been achieved if the reader agrees that this is indeed a direc-
tion worth exploring.
Acknowledgements
I thank the audience of this talk, especially Marta Jorba and Miguel A´ ngel Sebastia´n, for a helpful
discussion. I am also grateful to Manuel Garcia-Carpintero, to the two editors and to two anonymous
reviewers for insightful comments.
Disclosure statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the author.
Funding
The research leading to these results has received funding from the People Programme
(Marie Curie Actions) of the European Union's Seventh Framework Programme [FP7/
2007-2013] under REA grant agreement n8 [622127]. It was also supported by the DGI,
Spanish Government, research project n8 [FFI2013-47948-P]. The article arose from a
talk at the conference Phenomenology of Cognitive Experiences organised by the two
editors of this volume at University College Dublin in November 2014.
Notes
1.
By Castan˜eda ([1966] 1999, [1968] 1999), Perry (1979), Lewis (1979), Kaplan (1989), Evans
(1982), O'Brien (2007), among many others.
2.
The distinction is due to Perry (2002, 209).
3.
The distinction between "simply reﬂexive" and "super-reﬂexive" thoughts echoes the distinc-
tion made by Castan˜eda between "external" and "internal" reﬂexivity (1999, Ch. 10, 256).
4.
Please note that in talking about a subject who thinks of herself as the thinker, I am in no way
implying that she thinks of herself under the description "x is the thinker". To think of some-
thing as this or that is to think of it, as Kaplan (2012) puts it, in a "rich" rather than "thin"
way; namely, to think of it under a certain mode of presentation rather than to target it as a
bare individual. But not all modes of presentation are descriptive, a point ﬁrst emphasized by
Thinking of Oneself as the Thinker
155

Evans (1982) and McDowell (1984). It is now standard to accept what have been called, among
others, "de re senses" (McDowell 1984), "de re modes of presentation" (Bach 1987, Recanati
2012) or "non-descriptive ways of having in mind" (Kaplan 2012) alongside descriptive ones.
Section 2 below makes the case that a descriptive reading of the Thinker Intuition is
unsatisfactory.
5.
The intuition is endorsed explicitly by many writers, including Russell (1914), Higginbotham
(2003) and Peacocke (2014). It has a long philosophical history, in which Descartes, Locke
and Fichte, in particular, loom large. The intuition, however, might be disputed. An alternative
suggestion might be that, when one thinks of oneself as oneself, one thinks of oneself as agent.
This idea is at the core of a distinct tradition, which includes Anscombe (1975), Moran (2001)
and O'Brien (2007), among others. Arguably, however, in the act of reﬂecting on oneself, one's
mental agency, as the source of the current thinking, is one of the central forms of agency one is
made aware of. This suggests some common ground with the kind of view I propose here.
6.
There may be other, lower-level representations that are essentially egocentric, in having the
function to stand for the subject, where this does not necessarily involve her explicit recognition
of that fact. Such may be, for instance, the "body map" a subject uses for monitoring her own
body in proprioception. Representations such as these play an important role in our psychologi-
cal lives. They are, however, distinct from the concept of self, which is used in thought as
opposed to mere experience, and is deﬁned by super-reﬂexivity.
7.
Proponents of different indexical approaches to the I-concept include Zemach (1985), Higgin-
botham (2003), Howell (2006) and Garcı´a-Carpintero (2016). It may well be that not all of those
authors would accept all the features I attribute to the indexical model in this section. In describ-
ing what I call the "indexical model", I am not aiming for exegetical accuracy, but trying instead
to characterise a possible view which accounts for the Thinker Intuition along the model
suggested by the word "I" - a view whose core ideas are in fact accepted, explicitly or more
often implicitly, by many.
8.
I will not discuss other existing views of the concept of self, such as the demonstrative models of
Evans (1982) and Morgan (2015), the no-reference stance of Anscombe (1975), the relativist
approaches of Lewis (1979) and others, or the mental-ﬁle models of Perry (2002) and Recanati
(2012, Part VIII). Such a survey would take me too far beyond the goal of this essay, which is to
propose the phenomenal model as a possible new way to ﬂesh out to the Thinker Intuition. The
approaches listed above are not primarily designed to explain the intuition; the indexical model
arguably is, which makes it a natural contrast case here.
9.
The ﬁrst to have fully articulated a token-reﬂexive theory of this kind are probably Benveniste
(1958) and Reichenbach (1947), who also mentions Russell (1940) as an inspiration. Russell
(1914, 163 sq.) defends a version of the token-reﬂexive approach for both the word "I" and
the I-concept.
10.
This modal objection, ﬁrst presented by Castan˜eda ([1966] 1999, [1968] 1999), was further
developed by Kaplan (1989) and more recently Predelli (2005).
11.
For Kaplan, the content of "I" in a given context is in fact a constant function from possible
worlds to extensions (the same individual in each world), rather than the individual itself.
My omission of this further reﬁnement in Kaplan's view, however, has no bearing on what
follows.
12.
An acute discussion of this point is to be found in Nozick (1981, Chap. 1.2).
13.
A closely related but distinct option would consist in claiming that we can latch on to the present
thought merely by virtue of the fact that we have a conscious access to it, without committing to
the thought also being distinguished by a speciﬁc phenomenology. (See Block 1995 on the
difference between phenomenal consciousness and access-consciousness). In what follows, I
ignore the access-consciousness variant for simplicity's sake, and because I believe it to be
less promising than the phenomenal-consciousness variant. One reason is that the access-con-
sciousness variant does not obviously have the resources to explain the epistemic exclusivity of
the I-concept (see footnote 15 below). Whatever the chances that an appeal to access-conscious-
ness as a complement to the indexicalist view might be viable, however, it would in any case
also result in a hybrid view. My point in Section 4 below that the kind of approach I favour
is more economical would thus equally apply to this variant. I am grateful to an anonymous
reviewer for inviting me to clarify this.
14.
A token-reﬂexive description, as such, might be able to secure simple reﬂexivity if we suppose
that the thought represents itself thanks to a syntactic item whose function just is to stand for the
156
Marie Guillot

larger representation it is a part of (see Garcı´a-Carpintero 2016 for a sophisticated account of
this kind). Arguably, however, this still would not amount to super-reﬂexivity. The person
one thinks about would extensionally be guaranteed to be identical to the person thinking;
but this would arguably leave unexplained why she is aware of this fact.
15.
But see Garcı´a-Carpintero (2016, 194), who preserves exclusivity within a sophisticated frame-
work which shares some features (including token-reﬂexivity) with the indexical model.
16.
Why think that an appeal to phenomenal consciousness, rather than access-consciousness, is
needed to secure exclusivity? Access-consciousness, after all, is sufﬁcient to make a thought
available to introspection, thus enabling the subject to refer demonstratively to it as this
thought. However, this on its own may fall short of the required asymmetry with a third-
person access to the relevant thought. It is not obvious that others cannot equally refer demon-
stratively to my occurrent thoughts, for instance by monitoring my mental activity in real time
with a sophisticated brain scanner. A detailed discussion of this point would take me too far
aﬁeld, but see Recanati (2007), Chapter 25 on related issues. In any case, an appeal to
access-consciousness, whatever its chances of success, would also amount to an acknowledg-
ment that a "pure" indexicalist view is insufﬁcient, and we would be owed some details as to
how exactly the explanation might go.
17.
For instance Loar (1990, 7) and Horgan and Kriegel (2007).
18.
Similar ideas are defended in Gertler (2001, 2012), Levine (2003), Papineau (2008), among
others.
19.
For a thorough case for this claim, as well as some historical context, see Kriegel (2015),
Chapter 3.
20.
Kriegel (2015), Chapter 3, refers to it as "the phenomenology of entertaining".
21.
The speciﬁc view I am presenting here is new (to my knowledge), but it belongs to a wider
family of approaches according to which the I-concept is rooted in the phenomenal. See, for
example, Castan˜eda ([1966] 1999, [1968] 1999) and Kapitan (2015).
22.
In Guillot (2012), I explore a variant of the phenomenal model which uses the subjective char-
acter of conscious mental states as the phenomenal basis of the I-concept.
23.
More on this below in Section 4.
24.
Kapitan (2015), while not using the framework of phenomenal concepts, develops a sophisti-
cated account which offers the right sort of semantic ﬂexibility.
25.
I am grateful to Uriah Kriegel for help in distinguishing the two kinds of strategies.
26.
I do not mean to challenge in any way the standard approach to natural-kind concepts like
"gold" or "water", developed by Kripke and Putnam. What I suggest here is simply that
these are not the only kind of concepts we use to categorise the objects we encounter in percep-
tion. Plausibly, we rely heavily on the way perceptible objects appear to us for some forms of
categorisation. I thank Jonathan Way for inviting me to clarify this.
27.
One might worry that a phenomenal impression is not generally caused by a unique object: the
causal chain, in a given case, will typically involve any number of objects. Still, there is an intui-
tive sense in which a photograph of John stands for John, rather than for any of the other things
that contributed to causing the impression on the photosensitive ﬁlm (the silver salts, the camera
lens, the light beams bouncing off John, etc.). Other cases give more latitude for deciding what
the "appropriate" cause might be. Papineau (2008) thus notes that a given phenomenal appear-
ance (as of a greenﬁnch now landing on my apple-tree, for instance) can often equally be used to
refer to an individual (this particular bird) or to a kind (greenﬁnches). This ﬂexibility, however,
would only be a source of concern if we expected phenomenal-appearance concepts to be fully
individuated by their phenomenal bases. There is no reason why this should be the case. Those
concepts, as other kinds of concepts, can be individuated by their distinctive reference-rule, that
is, the condition an object has to satisfy to be their referent (cf. Peacocke 1992). As I argue in the
next paragraph, in the case of phenomenal-appearance concepts, a mention of their phenomenal
basis is necessary to spell out the relevant reference-rule (this is why they count as phenomen-
ally grounded concepts); but it is not sufﬁcient. What else is needed is a question for another
occasion. The remarks of this subsection hopefully provide an intuitive handle on the notion
of a phenomenal-appearance concept; my purpose is merely to argue that the I-concept has fea-
tures which warrant classifying it as a concept of this kind, not to give a comprehensive descrip-
tion of those concepts, in general.
28.
An anonymous referee objected that we might want to identify the source of the experience of
intellection as the thinking, rather than the thinker. It is certainly true in this case, as it typically
Thinking of Oneself as the Thinker
157

is with experiences, that a number of different entities play a role in the relevant causal chain. As
stressed in the previous footnote, however, this just means that a given experience can serve as
the phenomenal basis of different phenomenal-appearance concepts, referring to different enti-
ties that can count as a cause or origin. There is no reason why the phenomenology of intellec-
tion could not be used to form a concept of the thinking process, but it is equally available to
form a concept of the system that ultimately causes the experience of intellection, namely the
subject.
29.
See Chudnoff (2011) on what he calls the "presentational" aspect of phenomenology.
30.
See Section 2 above.
31.
See Coliva (2003) for a strong argument that some complex uses are not immune to mis-
reference.
32.
As I argue in Guillot (2013), the phenomenal model has the potential to explain why the concept
of self, when used in self-attributions of phenomenal properties, is also immune to what is
known as "error through misidentiﬁcation" (Shoemaker 1968); but showing this would lead
me too far aﬁeld. The previous points, however, should sufﬁce to make the case that the
phenomenal model is worth exploring further.
33.
I am grateful to an anonymous reviewer for inviting me to touch upon this ﬁliation, which would
deserve a much more detailed discussion, left for future work.
34.
See Dennett (1978), Chapter 17, for a detailed scenario of this kind.
35.
See Shoemaker (1968) on the related distinction between "de facto" and "absolute" forms of
another kind of immunity, namely immunity to error through misidentiﬁcation.
36.
Coliva (2003) makes a convincing case that mis-reference is in fact possible with the I-concept.
Her examples, however, concern more complex cases, where the individual referred to is sim-
ultaneously targeted under the I-concept and under further representations (for instance a per-
ception of the person's reﬂection in a mirror). Thinking of someone simply as "I", by contrast,
absolutely rules out the possibility of mis-reference.
37.
I thank an anonymous referee for raising this issue, and for helpful suggestions as to how to tackle it.
38.
The idea of mental ﬁles or dossiers has been extensively used since the 1960s, by Grice, Straw-
son, Kahneman, Heim, Perry, and Recanati among many others, to model various other kinds of
concepts, including those involved in anaphoric reference, memory, perceptual judgements, and
most recently singular or "de re" thoughts.
39.
Recanati (2012), Ch. 5 and 7, includes a detailed discussion of the concept of self within a
mental-ﬁle framework.
Notes on contributor
Marie Guillot is a Marie Curie Fellow in the Department of Philosophy at University College London
(UK). She has published articles on self-knowledge, de se attitudes, semantic relativism, Evans, and
Frege, and is co-editing with Manuel Garcı´a-Carpintero a volume of essays on the subjective character
of experience.
ORCiD
Marie Guillot
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-0647-1191
References
Anscombe, Gertrude E. M. 1975. "The First Person." In Mind and Language, edited by S. D.
Guttenplan, 45-65. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Bach, Kent. 1987. Thought and Reference. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bayne, Tim, and Michelle Montague, eds. 2011. Cognitive Phenomenology. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Benveniste, Emile. 1958. "De la subjectivite´ dans le langage." Journal de psychologie normale et
pathologique, July-September 55 (3): 257-265.
Block, Ned. 1995. "On a Confusion About a Function of Consciousness." Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 18 (2): 227-287.
158
Marie Guillot

Castan˜eda, Hector-Neri. [1966] 1999. "'He': A Study in the Logic of Self-Consciousness." Reprinted
in Castan˜eda.
Castan˜eda, Hector-Neri. [1968] 1999. "On the Phenomeno-Logic of the I." Reprint in H.-N.
Castan˜eda, The Phenomeno-Locic of the I, edited by James G. Hart and Tomis Kapitan.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Castan˜eda, Hector-Neri. 1999. The Phenomeno-Locic of the I. Edited by James G. Hart and Tomis
Kapitan. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Chalmers, David. 2003. "The Content and Epistemology of Phenomenal Belief." In Consciousness:
New Philosophical Perspectives, edited by Q. Smith and A. Jokic, 220-272. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Chudnoff, E. 2011. "What Intuitions Are Like." Philosophy and Phenomenological Research. 82:
625-654.
Chudnoff, E. 2015. Cognitive Phenomenology. New York: Routledge.
Coliva, Annalisa. 2003. "The First Person: Error Through Misidentiﬁcation, the Split Between
Speaker's and Semantic Reference, and the Real Guarantee." The Journal of Philosophy 100
(8): 416-31.
Dahlgru¨n, M. 2010. "The Notion of a Recognitional Concept and Other Confusions." Philosophical
Studies 150 (1): 139-160.
Dainton, Barry. 2008. The Phenomenal Self. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dennett, Daniel. 1978. Brainstorms: Philosophical Essays on Mind and Psychology. Montgomery,
VT: Bradford Books.
Evans, G. 1982. The Varieties of Reference. Posthumous edition by J. McDowell. Oxford: Clarendon
Press.
Frege, Gottlob. 1918. "Der Gedanke. Eine logische Untersuchung." Beitra¨ge zur Philosophie des
Deutschen Idealismus 1: 58-77.
Garcı´a-Carpintero, Manuel. 2016. "Token-Reﬂexive Presuppositions and the De Se." In About
Oneself, edited by M. Garcı´a-Carpintero and S. Torre, 179-199. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Gertler, Brie. 2001. "Introspecting Phenomenal States". Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
63: 305-328.
Gertler, Brie. 2012. "Renewed Acquaintance." In Introspection and Consciousness, edited by Declan
Smithies and Daniel Stoljar, 89-123. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Guillot, Marie. 2012. "Is the I-Concept a Phenomenal Concept?" Unpublished manuscript.
Guillot, Marie. 2013. "On Coliva on Three Properties of 'I'". Unpublished manuscript.
Higginbotham, Jim. 2003. "Remembering, Imagining, and the First Person." In Epistemology of
Language, edited by A. Barber, 496-533. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Horgan, T., and U. Kriegel. 2007. "Phenomenal Epistemology: What is Consciousness that We May
Know It So Well?" Philosophical Issues 17: 123-144.
Howell, R. J. 2006. "Self-Knowledge and Self-Reference." Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research 72 (1): 44-70.
Hume, David. [1739] 1896. "Appendix." Appendix of A Treatise of Human Nature. Edited by L. A.
Selby-Bigge, 623-639. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Kapitan, Tomis. 2015. "Is Subjectivity First-Personal?" In Pre-reﬂective Consciousness: Sartre and
Contemporary Philosophy of Mind, edited by S. Miguens, G. Preyer, and C. Bravo, 49-65.
New York: Routledge.
Kaplan, David. 2012. "An Idea of Donnellan." In Having In Mind: The Philosophy of Keith
Donnellan, edited by Joseph Almog and Paolo Leonardi, 122-175. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Kaplan, David. 1989. "Demonstratives." In Themes from Kaplan, edited by J. Almog, J. Perry, and H.
Wettstein, 481-563. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kriegel, Uriah. 2015. The Varieties of Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Levine, Joseph. 2001. Purple Haze: The Puzzle of Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Levine, Joseph. 2003. "Knowing What It's Like." In Privileged Access, edited by Brie Gertler, 45-52.
Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing Company.
Lewis, David. 1979. "Attitudes De Dicto and De Se." The Philosophical Review 88: 513-543.
Loar, Brian. 1990. "Phenomenal States." In Philosophical Perspectives: Action Theory and
Philosophy of Mind, edited by J. Tomberlin, vol. 4, 81-108. Atascadero, CA: Ridgeview.
Thinking of Oneself as the Thinker
159

McDowell, J. 1984. "De Re Senses." In Frege: Tradition and Inﬂuence, edited by C. Wright, 98-109.
Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Moran, Richard. 2001. Authority and Estrangement: An Essay on Self-Knowledge. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Morgan, Daniel. 2015. "The Demonstrative Model of First-Person Thought." Philosophical Studies
172 (2015): 1795-1811.
Nozick, Robert. 1981. Philosophical Explanations. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
O'Brien, Lucy. 2007. Self-Knowing Agents. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Papineau, David. 2008. "Phenomenal and Perceptual Concepts." In Phenomenal Concepts and
Phenomenal Knowledge: New Essays on Consciousness and Physicalism, edited by T. Alter
and S. Walter, 111-144. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Parﬁt, Derek. 1984. Reasons and Persons. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Peacocke, Christopher. 1992. A Study of Concepts. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Peacocke, Christopher. 2014. The Mirror of the World: Subjects, Consciousness, and Self-
Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Perry, John. 1979. "The Problem of the Essential Indexical." Nouˆs 13: 3-21.
Perry, John. 2001. Reference and Reﬂexivity. Stanford: CSLI Publications.
Perry, John. 2002. Identity, Personal Identity, and the Self. Indianapolis: Hackett.
Pitt, D. 2004. "The Phenomenology of Cognition, or, What Is It Like to Think that P?" Philosophy
and Phenomenological Research 69 (1): 1-36.
Pitt, D. 2011. "Introspection, Phenomenality, and the Availability of Intentional Content." In
Cognitive Phenomenology, edited by Tim Bayne and Michelle Montague, 141-173. New
York: Oxford University.
Predelli, Stefano. 2005. Contexts: Meaning, Truth, and the Use of Language. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Recanati, Franc¸ois. 2007. Perspectival Thought. A Plea for (Moderate) Relativism. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Recanati, Franc¸ois. 2012. Mental Files. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Reichenbach, Hans. 1947. Elements of Symbolic Logic. New York: The Free Press, Collier-
Macmillan.
Russell, Bertrand. 1914. "On the Nature of Acquaintance." The Monist, 24: 1-16, 161-87, 435-53.
Russell, Bertrand. 1940. "Egocentric Particulars." Chapter VII in Bertrand Russell, An Inquiry into
Meaning and Truth, 108-115. New York: Norton.
Shoemaker, Sydney. 1968. "Self-Reference and Self-Awareness." Journal of Philosophy 65 (19):
555-67.
Zahavi, Dan. 2005. Subjectivity and Selfhood. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Zemach, Edward. 1985. "De Se and Descartes: A New Semantics for Indexicals." Nouˆs 19 (2): 181-
204.
160
Marie Guillot

