British Journal for the History of Philosophy
ISSN: 0960-8788 (Print) 1469-3526 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rbjh20
The we and its many forms: Kurt Stavenhagen's
contribution to social phenomenology
Alessandro Salice
To cite this article: Alessandro Salice (2020) The we and its many forms: Kurt Stavenhagen's
contribution to social phenomenology, British Journal for the History of Philosophy, 28:6,
1094-1115, DOI: 10.1080/09608788.2020.1737914
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/09608788.2020.1737914
Published online: 30 Mar 2020.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 187
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 4 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rbjh20

ARTICLE
The we and its many forms: Kurt Stavenhagen's
contribution to social phenomenology
Alessandro Salice
Department of Philosophy, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland
ABSTRACT
'We' is said in many ways. This paper investigates Kurt Stavenhagen's neglected
account of diﬀerent kinds of 'we', which is maintained to be one of the most
sophisticated within classical phenomenology. The paper starts by elaborating
on the phenomenological distinction between mass, society, and community
by claiming that individuals partake in episodes of experiential sharing only
within communities. Stavenhagen conceptualizes experiential sharing as a
meshing of conscious experiences infused by a feeling of us-ness. The
remainder of the paper focuses on Stavenhagen's distinction of various senses
of us: when individual share preferences, have mutual respect, or emotionally
evaluate the world according to a cultural tradition, they elicit a sense of us of
diﬀerent
kind
and,
thus,
form
communities
of
diﬀerent
kind.
Within
phenomenology, Stavenhagen should be credited with the merit of having
unearthed the aggregative, we-generating force of preferences, of respect,
and of (certain) emotions.
ARTICLE HISTORY Received 4 August 2019; Revised 10 January and 7 February 2020; Accepted 1 March
2020
KEYWORDS Experiential sharing; communities; social phenomenology; Kurt Stavenhagen;
we-experiences
1. Introduction
An important line of research has recently started to uncover the vast body of
insights secured by classical phenomenology on the fundaments of human
sociality - a topic which is currently occupying important debates in philos-
ophy of mind and social ontology (see Bratman, Shared Agency; Gilbert,
Joint Commitment; List and Pettit, Group Agency; Searle, Social World; Toma-
sello, Natural History). By now, this line of research has established that
members of the so-called Munich and Göttingen Circles of Phenomenology
have extensively discussed issues including experiential sharing, the meta-
physics of social and institutional facts, the relation between experiential
sharing and social cognition (Salice, Phenomenology of the Munich and
© 2020 BSHP
CONTACT Alessandro Salice
alessandro.salice@ucc.ie
BRITISH JOURNAL FOR THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY
2020, VOL. 28, NO. 6, 1094-1115
https://doi.org/10.1080/09608788.2020.1737914

Göttingen Circles; Salice and Schmid, Phenomenological Approach; Szanto and
Moran, Phenomenology of Sociality). Works by Husserl (Szanto, Husserl; Zahavi,
Second-Person Engagement), Reinach (Salice and Uemura, Social Acts), Scheler
(Salice, Collective Intentionality; Schloßberger, Varieties of Togetherness), Stein
(Vendrell Ferran, Empathy; Szanto, Collective Emotions; Gombocz and Salice,
Edith Stein), von Hildebrand (Salice, Communities; León, Autism), Walther
(León and Zahavi, Phenomenology; Zahavi and Salice, Phenomenology of the
We), among others, have been (and still are) subject to an in-depth interpret-
ation, which not only considers them from a historical perspective, but also
aims at showing their relevance to systematic questions.
This paper intends to contribute to this line of investigation by presenting
the work of a phenomenologist that so far has been left at the periphery of
this excavating work: Kurt Stavenhagen. Although his name has gone
almost completely unnoticed in this strand of research, Stavenhagen
devoted to social phenomenology the vast majority of his publications and,
especially, three monograph studies (The Essence of the Nation of 1934, Critical
Developments in Folk Theory of 1936, and Homeland as Meaning of Life of 1948
[1939]) and a long series of articles (of which two are particularly signiﬁcant to
the purposes of this paper: "Respect as Feeling of Solidarity and Foundation of
Communities" of 1931 and "Charismatic Unities of Personalities", 1933).1 Argu-
ably, only very few other phenomenologists have published as extensively as
Stavenhagen on the grounds of human sociality, which makes current
research's inattention to his contributions an even more unfortunate gap.
The present article aims at ﬁlling this research desideratum by oﬀering the
ﬁrst comprehensive view of Stavenhagen's social phenomenology in the lit-
erature. It is claimed not only that his description of experiential sharing
reaches an unprecedented level of sophistication within phenomenology,
but also that his account of the various mechanisms, which regulate the emer-
gence of communities, signiﬁcantly advances the phenomenological under-
standing of sociality.
It has been suggested, not implausibly, that Stavenhagen's long-standing
interest in social phenomenology is nourished by the vicissitudes of his per-
sonal life (Spiegelberg, Phenomenological Movement, 220). As he belonged
to the German-speaking minority in the Baltic countries, it might not come
as a surprise that large parts of his philosophical reﬂection are concerned
with issues related to social identity and group memberships (see Stavenha-
gen, Person, 308; Spiegelberg, Phenomenological Movement; Rozenvalds, Phe-
nomenological Ideas in Latvia; Tilitzki, Die deutsche Universitätsphilosophie,
805f). It also merits attention that, during the Nazi occupation of the Baltic
1All translations from Stavenhagen are mine. Stavenhagen's other important contributions are an inves-
tigation into the phenomenology of religious attitudes (Absolute Stellungnahmen), a Kant biography
(Kant), and the posthumously published Person and Personality, which is mainly concerned with philo-
sophical anthropology.
BRITISH JOURNAL FOR THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY
1095

countries, Stavenhagen took up the important chairs for philosophy in Königs-
berg (1939-41) and Poznań (1941-45). These facts could invite the conjecture
of Stavenhagen's allegiance to Nazi ideology. This inference should be
resisted, however.
Stavenhagen, who actively engaged in the political debate surrounding the
question of German-speaking minorities in the twenties and thirties, was not a
member of the Nazi party; his political views were not aligned with - indeed
opposed to - Nazism (see Stavenhagen, "Chauvinismus"), and he was looked
at by the party with profound "uneasiness [Unbehagen]" (Tilitzki, Die deutsche
Universitätsphilosophie, 806, see also 789ﬀ). Even more relevant to the pur-
poses of this paper is the fact that the content of the above-mentioned pub-
lications clearly reveals that Stavenhagen's understanding of the synonymous
concepts of cultural nation or people (Kulturnation and Volk, see Stavenhagen,
Wesen, 93) is far removed from the Blut und Boden characterization promoted
by Nazi ideologues in that period, which he bluntly dismisses as nothing else
than "pre-scientiﬁc magic" (Wesen, 8, 65). As this article will clarify, Stavenha-
gen considers the concepts of nation or people to point to a particular kind of
communities: these are communities, which are founded in language, tra-
dition, and in the self-representation the group has of itself (a "we-idea
[Wir-Idee]"), but not in geographic - and certainly not in biological - features.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 1 introduces Stavenhagen's pos-
ition against the backdrop of the phenomenological distinction between
mass, society, and community. Section 2 explores three main forms of com-
munities: cohesive communities, communities of respect, and cultural
nations or people.2 In the conclusion, I sketch some lines of investigations
for future research on Stavenhagen's social phenomenology.
2. Mass, society, and community
In a recent paper, Amie Thomasson claims that, since the notion of a group is
variegated and multifarious, philosophers should be more concerned with the
pragmatic use ordinary language speakers make of that notion rather than
aiming at a real deﬁnition of it (Thomasson, Ontology of Social Groups). Early
phenomenologists would agree with the premise of Thomasson's reasoning,
but would reject its consequence. They would rather argue that Thomasson's
2This is my terminology. Stavenhagen calls cohesive communities "charismatic communities" and commu-
nities of respect "aidesmatic". "Charisma" is used in its old Greek meaning of "gift" and qualiﬁes those
communities where the individuals "oﬀer themselves as a gift" to the others ("Charimastische Persön-
lichkeitseinungen": 36 fn3, this term, hence, is not used in its Weberian connotation referring to a char-
acter feature of some individuals, see Weber 2010). The adjective "aidesmatic" stems from the Greek
(where the term for respect is aidōs [αι᾿δώς]) and so does "pragmatic" (pragmata [πράγματα], situation,
but also action, Stavenhagen, Wesen, 47). It should be noted that Stavenhagen enjoyed a university edu-
cation (and did advanced research) in classical philology in Göttingen, where he also established con-
tacts with phenomenologists (see Person, 308).
1096
A. SALICE

premise delivers the reason why one must put eﬀorts into distinguishing
various kinds of groups by identifying their distinctive features.
It is important not to misunderstand the task phenomenologists set for
themselves, though. On the one hand, they worked towards a taxonomy of
fundamental kinds of social groups (Scheler, Formalism, 519ﬀ). On the other
hand, they were aware that actually existing groups do not neatly fall under
the kinds at the basis of this taxonomy, for they usually have mixed natures
(Stavenhagen, Wesen, 27): they exemplify diﬀerent kinds at the same time.
For instance, families are constituted by a mixture of societal as well as com-
munal features (community and society being two distinct kinds of groups, as
discussed below). However, phenomenologists also contended that actually
existing groups do tend to exemplify a single kind more typically than
others (a certain family, e.g. could have features that are predominantly
societal or communal). If that is correct, then sociological descriptions of actu-
ally existing groups presuppose a preliminary understanding of basic kind of
groups (in terms of which actual groups are described). This, in the phenom-
enologist's eyes, justiﬁes the task of developing a sound taxonomy of those
kinds.
The starting point of this taxonomy is the distinction between societies and
communities, which has been originally laid out by Ferdinand Tönnies in his
work Community and Society. While all phenomenologists ultimately endorse
that distinction (Scheler, Formalism; Stavenhagen, Wesen; Stein Philosophy of
Psychology; von Hildebrand, Metaphysik; Walther, Ontologie), they importantly
reﬁne it in two diﬀerent ways. First, they complement it with an investigation
into the social attitudes that members typically adopt towards each other in
the two groups. More precisely, they contend that diﬀerent kinds of groups
correlate with diﬀerent kinds of social attitudes adopted by their members.
Second, they introduce a third kind of group that remained unnoticed in
Tönnies' dichotomy: the mass or crowd. How do phenomenologists describe
these three kinds of social groups?
Let us start with societies. What is typical about societies is that individuals
become aware of the experiences of another individual and take these as
reasons to form other (individual) experiences.3 Suppose that Sam is sad at
her failed exam and Pam rejoices in Sam's sadness, thereby savouring an
episode of Schadenfreude. Sam becomes aware of Pam's emotion and
reacts with resentment. Or imagine that Pam commiserates with Sam in her
sadness and, thus, sympathizes with her, whereupon Sam reciprocates with
gratitude. In either case, the subjects become aware of the other's experiences
and take them to be reasons for forming other aﬀective attitudes: the
3There are diﬀerent ways in which a subject can become aware of somebody else's experience, but phe-
nomenologists concur that the most fundamental one—from a developmental, but also conceptual per-
spective—is empathy. In empathy, the subject grasps the other experience in an intuitive or perceptual
way (see Zahavi, Empathy).
BRITISH JOURNAL FOR THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY
1097

individuals' aﬀective experiences interlock in a speciﬁc way. Something similar
may happen in the conative dimension. Suppose Pam intends to publish a
paper and comes to know that Sam has the same intention. Sam and Pam
may take their individual intentions to be reasons for forming other inten-
tions: to maximize their strategic interests, they could decide to join forces
in order to reach their goal (to publish a paper). In all these cases, Pam and
Sam form (short-lived and small-case) societies. I will elaborate on further
aspects of societies below, but it is important to emphasize already now
that, in a society, one's experience impacts another's experience in the
sense that members of a society consciously factor in others' experiences in
their emotional lives and deliberations.
Yet, there are other ways in which one experience can 'impact' somebody
else's experiential life. In the mass, such an impact is purely causal. For
instance, imagine that, by talking with Pam about her failed exam and its con-
sequences for her life, Sam's sadness passes to Pam - here, Pam becomes sad,
but does not have a reason for being sad. She will be typically unable to report
why she feels sad and may even ignore how she acquired her emotion: this is
a case of emotional contagion (Stavenhagen, Kritische Gänge, 19ﬀ). Some-
times, individuals may become aware of this psychological mechanism and
exploit it, e.g. to regulate their emotions. Sam, who is in a bad mood
because she didn't pass the exam, knows that, if she goes to Pam's party,
she will be infected by the crowd's jolly atmosphere, which will help her
coping with her sadness. Importantly, even in this last example, what charac-
terizes contagion is the fact that the agent does not have a reason for eliciting
the emotion (and that is precisely what Sam intends to exploit). Interestingly,
contagion may happen at the conative level, too (Stavenhagen, Kritische
Gänge, 22; Scheler, Sympathy, 37), where desires of an individual may pass
to somebody else without the recipient having a reason for the desire.
Think of fashion phenomena: it is often unclear to subjects what motivates
their desire to buy a particular piece of clothing (which many in their environ-
ment wear) or to baptise a child with a certain name (which often recurs in a
certain group at a certain time). Contagion is the mechanism that animates
masses or crowds.
Mass and society are diﬀerent kinds of groups, but there is an important
respect in which they are similar. The experience that results in the subject
after her experiential life has been 'impacted' by the other's experience has
a speciﬁc subjective property: "what-it-is-like-for-me-ness" (Zahavi and
Kriegel, For-me-ness). This expression captures the idea that the experience
feels like something to me (or is had in the I-mode, Tuomela, Sociality). This
is reﬂected in the verbal reports of the experiences, which usually employ
the ﬁrst personal singular pronoun 'I', True, in certain societies, especially
those that emerge upon a strategic or "rational connection of interests"
(rationale Interessenverbindung, Stavenhagen, Wesen, 32), individuals can
1098
A. SALICE

and typically do refer to themselves by using the ﬁrst personal plural pronoun
'we': accordingly, Pam and Sam may frame their intention to write the paper
together as "we intend to write the paper," where the pronoun is employed
with a summative meaning (Stavenhagen, "Charismatische", 38). The summa-
tive meaning, according to which 'we' just is 'you and I', should be contrasted
with the collective sense of the pronoun, which points to the group (us)
formed by you and me (see Schmid, Subject, on the diﬀerence between sum-
mative and collective meanings of the ﬁrst personal plural pronoun).
The collective sense of 'we' is employed by members of communities and
maps onto a diﬀerent subjective property. Communal experiences, i.e. experi-
ences shared among the members of a community, are permeated by a sense
of us. This property could also be called "what-it-is-like-for-us-ness" (Stavenha-
gen speaks of our-ness, Unserigkeit, see "Charismatische", 38): here, individuals
entertain their attitudes from their ﬁrst plural singular perspective (or in the
we-mode, see Tuomela, Sociality). The experience feels like ours to me qua
community member. Although other phenomenologists, too, subscribe to
the existence of this subjective property (e.g. see Walther, Ontologie), Staven-
hagen's investigation into this property is original insofar as he elaborates on
four interrelated features that characterize communal experiences (see also
Salice, Kurt Stavenhagen).
Suppose Pam and Sam share an emotion of sadness because their holiday
to Japan must be cancelled due to some unexpected reason. Here, Pam's and
Sam's emotions not only point to the same intentional object, but also evalu-
ate it in the same way. Although necessary, these two conditions (identity of
the intentional object and convergent evaluation of the object) are not yet
suﬃcient to qualify the experience as shared or communal: certain summa-
tive scenarios may satisfy them (Walther, Ontologie; Zahavi and Salice, Phe-
nomenology of the We; Searle, Collective Intentions). What must be added to
turn the summative into a collective scenario is "the demolition of a phenom-
enological wall" (Stavenhagen, "Charismatische", 39; Walther, Ontologie, 74):
Sam's experience must impact Pam's in such a way that, based on her aware-
ness of Sam's sadness, Pam lives through her experience as being one and
the same with Sam's, which is to say: the experience is lived through by
Pam as ours. The emotion is not experienced as numerically distinct from
Sam's experience anymore, making us-ness an "immanent constituent of
the experience" itself ("Charismatische", 38; Wesen, 30). Call a 'we-experience'
an experience that has us-ness as its constituent or exempliﬁes 'what-it-is-
like-for-us-ness'.
If Pam and Sam live through a we-experience of sadness, the way in which
they intentionally relate to the emotions' intentional object undergoes a sub-
stantial modiﬁcation. To capture this idea, which is the second feature that
characterizes we-experiences, Stavenhagen appeals to Husserl's mature
theory of intentionality (Husserl, Ideen) and especially to the idea that
BRITISH JOURNAL FOR THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY
1099

noeses (what roughly coincides with an experience's mode [Searle, Intention-
ality] or manner [Chalmers, Representational Character]) are always correlated
to noemata (the intentional objects insofar as these are experienced). Accord-
ing to this idea, a change in the noesis necessitates a change in the corre-
sponding noema. Now, we have seen that some of a subject's experiences
can be impacted by the mental states of others in such a way that the
subject lives through these experiences as ours. Another way of putting this
is that the noeses of (some of) our experiences are coloured by a peculiar sub-
jective property: us-ness. When this is the case, Stavenhagen claims, the cor-
responding noemata acquire the feature of "being familiar to us" ("sich bei
dem gemeinsam heimisch fühlen", "Charismatische", 39). One way to under-
stand this idea is that, when an object becomes familiar to us, our experiences
unveil an aspect of the intentional object that becomes visible only insofar as,
and to the extent that, it is intended by us. Sometimes, such 'familiarity' may
motivate people to keep their collectively valued goods in secret. Imagine a
group of friends, children or teenagers, keeping those things that are
central to their relation in secret from adults or other out-group members: a
particular toy, a game, or a book. It could be claimed that this form of behav-
iour is motivated by the in-group members' sense that only they can under-
stand those items properly. Those goods, that is, are preserved from the sight
of those who are not in a position to appreciate their true meaning.
This second element has consequences for the very subject of the inten-
tional act: if something is familiar to us in the sense that there is an aspect
that the object reveals only to us ("Charismatische", 43ﬀ), then it is not only
to me and not only to you that the object is given, but precisely to us. This
is the third feature that essentially characterizes we-experiences: their
phenomenal subject is the group. Speaking of a 'phenomenal subject' is
not to postulate a group subject of the experience, however (Wesen, 29). It
just means that the experience is lived through by the subject in that particu-
lar way insofar as the subject understands herself as group member. Since I
am having an experience only to the extent in which I understand myself
as a member of us, this is our experience: we live through that experience
together (analogously: if there is something that I own only insofar as you
co-own it, it is ours: we own it).4
4Stavenhagen concurs with many authors in contemporary debates relating to the idea that collective atti-
tudes require identiﬁcation with the group and, therefore, a self-understanding as a group member
(important diﬀerences in their accounts notwithstanding, authors like List and Pettit (Group Agency),
Pacherie (Intentional Joint Agency), Gold and Sugden (Collective Intentions) endorse this idea).
However, Stavenhagen does not oﬀer a particularly informative description of such a self-understanding.
It appears rather uncontroversial that this self-understanding cannot be a mere belief: one can believe to
be a member of a multitude of groups without this belief having any impact on one's emotions, inten-
tions, or actions. In previous work, I have suggested that this self-understanding may be described as a
Pushmi-Pullyu Representation (Salice and Miyazono, Being one of us; Millikan, Varieties). Accordingly, to
acquire a self-understanding as group member is to acquire a representation of a hybrid kind which, at
once, describes the subject as a group member and, concomitantly, directs her to act as such. This idea
1100
A. SALICE

Living through a we-experience entails the disposition of engaging in pro-
social behaviour. This is the fourth feature characterizing we-experiences.
When Sam and Pam share an experience in the sense just described, they
are predisposed to help and support each other (Kritische Gänge, 32). Impor-
tantly, the motivation for such behaviour derives from the we-experience
itself and does not rely on other factors like moral maxims, concerns for
one's reputation, one's character traits (although it is not excluded that
those factors could also play a motivational role in communal scenarios). Soli-
darity - thus understood as a disposition to pro-social behaviour grounded in
we-experiences - characterizes communities and communities alone. This,
again, is not meant to exclude that instances of help and support are
present in masses and societies, but there the members gain the motivation
to perform those actions precisely (and only) from the other factors alluded to
above.
At this juncture, it is important to highlight that the understanding of
oneself as member of us, and thus the uniﬁcation with the other, is itself inten-
tional. We-experiences have double-intentionality: they consist in being
directed to an intentional object in a particular manner and in relating to
that very experience as an experience which is ours (see Scheler, Formalism,
519; Stein, Philosophy of Psychology, 137; Walther, Ontologie, 84ﬀ). Interest-
ingly, the second intention (just as the ﬁrst) can misﬁre. If it misﬁres, the
subject experiences disillusion or disappointment (Stavenhagen, "Charisma-
tische", 46 - the term is used here in Husserl's sense to express an intentional
act that is frustrated by contrasting evidence, Husserl, Logische Untersuchun-
gen, 574ﬀ): the subject has understood herself as group member, but has
not uniﬁed because the other has not uniﬁed. Consider this case: Pam and
Sam are sad because their holiday to Japan has been cancelled. Sam and
Pam are saddened, but Sam's sadness is transformed according to the four
features spelled out above, whereas Pam does not reciprocate. She thinks
that the event does not demand such an inﬂated emotional response. Or
she is irritated by Sam because she takes Sam's profuse expression of
sadness to be an indication of self-indulgence. So, whereas Sam does unify
with Pam (Sam undergoes a we-experience), Pam does not. How to describe
this scenario? Stavenhagen claims that it qualiﬁes as summative - but in con-
trast to merely summative cases, it also involves something more: the
unfulﬁlled unifying intention on Sam's side ("Charismatische", 39f).
Although Stavenhagen's description of shared experiences reaches an
unprecedented level of phenomenological complexity, its contribution so
far aligns with that of other phenomenologists in considering the possibility
of shared experiences a distinctive feature of communities. Yet, Stavenhagen
appears consistent with Stavenhagen's own view, as the considerations on the 'we-idea' at the end of
subsection 3.3 may show.
BRITISH JOURNAL FOR THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY
1101

takes this description to be the starting point of further investigations into the
origin of that very self-understanding as group member, which is so crucial to
we-experiences: what prompts a move from a self-understanding as an indi-
vidual person to a self-understanding as a group member? In dealing with this
question, Stavenhagen delivers his most original contribution to social phe-
nomenology, or so I argue. By investigating this transformation in self-under-
standing, Stavenhagen comes to the conclusion that this process is
contingent on diﬀerent sets of conditions. This translates into the idea that
there are diﬀerent kinds of communities, which is a point that remained
almost completely unexplored by Stavenhagen's fellow phenomenologists.5
The next section addresses Stavenhagen's distinction between two kinds of
communities (spiritual and practical), and it expands on the three main
forms of spiritual communities.
3. Spiritual communities
To understand the speciﬁcity of spiritual communities, it may help to contrast
them with pragmatic communities. Just as for spiritual communities, members
of pragmatic communities can share experiences, which rely on their self-under-
standing as group members. What is peculiar of pragmatic communities is that
such self-understandingderives fromthe worldly circumstances in which individ-
ualshappentoﬁndthemselves(which iswhypragmaticcommunitiessometimes
are also called "vital communities" [Lebensgemeinschaften] or "communities of
destiny" [Schicksalsgemeinschaften], Stavenhagen, Wesen, 46; Heimat, 17f).
Imagine that Sam and Pam do not know each other, but destiny brings
them together, after a cruise ship accident, where they ﬁnd themselves in
the same rescue boat. The destiny of Sam is closely intermingled with that
of Pam for one will be safe only if the other will be safe, too (Stavenhagen,
Heimat, 74 fn1). This example is obviously extreme because of the rigid inter-
dependence of the destiny of the parties involved, but other social situations
(think of military comradeships or of neighbourhoods) may be described in
similar terms: individuals here exemplify the property of "being more or less
close in a situation and, because of it, being reliant on mutual services" (Sta-
venhagen, Wesen, 39; philosophy of social sciences speaks of these situations
as satisfying the "same boat condition", where a given goal is satisﬁed if and
only if it is satisﬁed for all group members, see Tuomela, Sociality, 50). Because
of these circumstances, individuals unify and, by conceiving of themselves as
group members, will share experiences with each other (which typically
revolve around a sense of mutual responsibility, see Wesen, 38f).
5In addition to mass, society, and community, Scheler discusses the total person (Gesamtperson) as a
further kind of group. It is controversial whether the total person identify a fourth, distinct, kind of
group or a sub-kind of community, see Salice, Collective Intentionality.
1102
A. SALICE

In spiritual communities, the way to achieve self-understanding as group
member is entirely diﬀerent. What triggers transformation in self-understand-
ing is primarily the fact that the individuals have certain aggregative attitudes:
e.g. they like each other, they respect each other, or they inherit emotions
from other group members. Of course, social situations remain the back-
ground against which those attitudes are formed, but those situations are
not such that they psychologically compel those attitudes in the individuals.
They do not because they do not presuppose an interlocking of the individ-
uals' personal lives (which is not to deny that individuals can have those
aggregative attitudes also in same boat scenarios). I now turn to the three
main kinds discussed by Stavenhagen.
3.1. Cohesive communities
The socio-psychological term "cohesiveness", which expresses mutual attrac-
tion or liking (see Hogg and Abrams, Social Identiﬁcations, 84), is alien to Sta-
venhagen. However, the ﬁrst kind of spiritual communities can be qualiﬁed as
'cohesive' because mutual attraction is pinpointed as the thriving force that
brings individuals together in these communities. Examples of charismatic
communities include friendships, fandoms, romantic relationships. As this
kind of community has been discussed elsewhere (Salice, Kurt Stavenhagen),
a rough outline of Stavenhagen's ideas may suﬃce for the purposes of this
paper.
Suppose Pam comes to know that Sam has a passion for Japanese kaiseki-
ryōri cuisine, just as she does. While scenarios like this include merely overlap-
ping preferences (Pam happens to have an attitude that is of the same type
of Sam's and is directed to the same object), Stavenhagen maintains that
these summative scenarios can easily turn into communal aggregations:
imagine further that, after Pam comes to know of Sam's liking of kaiseki-ryōri,
she forms the expectation that Sam also likes Japanese literature (as she
does). If this expectation is frustrated, the distributive or summative scenario
remains what it is - a matter of contingency. But if it is fulﬁlled, it may motivate
a further expectation, say, the expectation that Pam likes travelling and explor-
ing Japan (as Sam does). If this and subsequent expectations, too, are conﬁrmed,
Pam may not only begin to frame hers and Pam's experience to be theirs, she will
also start to direct her preferences to Sam: she will start to like her. But why does
having a preference matching the preference of somebody else sustains the
expectation of further preferences' overlap? And why does preferences'
overlap lead to experiential sharing and, eventually, to mutual liking?
Stavenhagen considers preferences (liking or disliking) to be motivated by
long-standing concerns (Grundhaltungen) that shape our mental life. These
fundamental concerns do not have a single intentional target, but rather
delimit a whole domain of objects (in the broadest sense of the term
BRITISH JOURNAL FOR THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY
1103

'object'), which the subject considers valuable in a certain respect. For
instance, Pam's passion for kaiseki-ryōri is motivated by, say, her long-endur-
ing concern for elegance over opulence or for simplicity over baroque-ness.
These concerns usually shape one's life by selecting one's whole range of
single preferences. Now, when Pam becomes aware of Sam's preference,
she takes this to be indicative of Sam's long-standing concern, a long-stand-
ing concern which may delimit the same domain of objects that she, too, con-
siders to be valuable. That is why, according to Stavenhagen, Pam will expect
that she and Sam entertain further overlapping preferences. Furthermore, if
several expectations are satisﬁed, that delivers conﬁrmation to Pam that her
domain of valuable objects does indeed coincide with Sam's: they inhabit
the same world of valuable objects because they share the very same
concern. They, together, face and value the world in the same way and
from the very same perspective. This sameness of perspective elicits a self-
understanding as group member and, correlatively, a sense of us. This has
two important consequences.
On the one hand, us-ness transforms the phenomenality of Pam's and
Sam's experiences: since they have acquired an understanding of themselves
as group members, this enables them to live through their preferences as
theirs, collectively. On the other, depending on the extent to which the two
domains mesh, the individuals become naturally pre-disposed to like each
other: by realizing that one appreciates the world in the same way as some-
body else does, one also, by the same token, includes the other in one's
domain of valuable objects, whereby one starts to like the other person
(and vice versa). So, 'mediate cohesive communities' (communities that grav-
itate around those objects in the world to which the members accord their
preferences) tend to evolve into 'immediate cohesive communities' (commu-
nities where the attitudes of the individuals - in addition, to be directed to the
world - also target the other community member). They tend to evolve in this
way because mediate communities, in a sense, already are (a watered-down
form of) immediate communities. The raison d'être of these two communities
is identical: this is the same evaluative concern for the world, which has
mutual attraction as its psychological counterpart.
3.2. Communities of respect
Preferences, in virtue of their very nature, contribute to the formation of com-
munities of a speciﬁc kind. The same can be said about respect ('Achtung'): this
attitude has the power to aggregate individuals in a communal sense (Staven-
hagen, Achtung). Therefore, an understanding of how communities emerge
out of respect must presuppose a clariﬁcation of the very notion of respect,
with which
Stavenhagen operates. To do so, I ﬁrst identify the speciﬁc
1104
A. SALICE

intentional object of respect, I then move on to discuss the self-understanding
of the respecting person, and ﬁnally I focus on the aggregative force of
respect.
Respect is introduced as a member of a family of recognition attitudes,
which includes trust, reliance, and admiration in the sense of "being
impressed by somebody" (imponieren, Stavenhagen, Achtung, 14f). An analo-
gical proportion holds among these four concepts: respect is to trust what
admiration is to reliance. The proportion is based on the ideas that reliance
and admiration are directed to the other as a creature with certain psychologi-
cal traits, whereas trust and respect are characterized as moral attitudes in the
sense that they target the other as a moral person. Reliance and trust include a
reference to the action of another person, to which the person targeted by the
attitude is supposed to contribute (directly or indirectly). Respect and admira-
tion are free of such reference.
Focusing on respect, what is the particular aspect under which the moral
person is respected? Being a moral person, Stavenhagen claims, goes
together with having certain moral rights and obligations. However, respect
is not due to a person merely because of her rights or obligations. For one
can have rights and obligations while ignoring their existence and, therefore,
without acting on them, whereas respect tracks a particular aspect of moral
agency.6 Especially when it comes to obligations, one can be aware of
having an obligation, but without feeling committed (sich-verpﬂichtet-fühlen;
see Achtung, 10) to act on that obligation. By contrast, if you feel committed,
you take seriously - or you feel responsible for - the obligation that accrues to
you:7 this amounts to adopting a certain moral stance towards the world
which can be expressed as follows: "there is a world, which demands
certain courses of conduct" (Achtung, 20).
The moral person, insofar as she adopts this particular stance, is the target
of what Stavenhagen calls 'dispositional' respect (in contradistinction to
'occurrent' respect, see below).8 Dispositional respect involves an image
6In making this restriction, Stavenhagen distances himself from the Kantian conception of respect as an
attitude owed to all persons in virtue of their dignity (Darwall, Kant on Respect) and by distinguishing
respect from admiration, he also signals that his notion of respect does not coincide with what is also
sometimes called "appraisal respect" (Darwall, Second Person Standpoint).
7Importantly, feeling a sense of commitment may or may not be warranted: it is warranted, if the obli-
gation it is about exists, otherwise it is unwarranted. The distinction between sense of commitment
and obligation is originally drawn by Reinach (Civil Law) and recurs in contemporary discussions in cog-
nitive sciences (Michael et al., Sense of Commitment) and moral psychology (Tomasello, Moral
Psychology).
8As mentioned, the moral person can also be made the target of another attitude: moral trust (sittliches
Vertrauen). To be viewed as trustworthy is to be viewed as a person who considers as her obligation to
contribute to somebody else's (i.e. the trustor's) endeavour. Trust is not reliance, because reliance
responds to psychological, not moral, features of the self. That is why, given the psychological character
of an individual, one can rely on her to contribute to one's endeavor, although one may not trust her to
do so. A similar consideration applies to admiration: a particular action may reveal the audacious char-
acter of its agent, which impresses us. However, this form of admiration does not correspond to respect
because it doesn't track moral features of the person.
BRITISH JOURNAL FOR THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY
1105

(Bild; see Achtung, 19) of how this person faces the world of obligations: while
the person is the focal target of attitude, the image is its non-thematic or per-
ipheral object (Achtung, 22). Importantly, this image may be frustrated by the
actions and attitudes of the (dispositionally) respected person, in which case
respect may dissolve. For instance, Pam dispositionally respects Sam because
of (what appears to her to be) a responsible attitude towards her obligations.
However, at a closer inspection, Pam notices that, in certain cases, the motiva-
tional force of Sam's sense of commitment is blocked by countervailing
instances like fear or self-interest, in which case Sam omits to act on her obli-
gation. Or Pam notices that Sam does act on her obligation, yet her action is
not motivated by her sense of commitment, but, say, by fear or self-interest. In
all these circumstances, Pam's respect in Sam may not only fade, but even be
replaced by the polar opposite attitude of respect: contempt (Verachtung).9 By
contrast, if the sense of commitment motivates one to act on the obligation,
then the image is conﬁrmed and dispositional respect turns into (or is corro-
borated by) actual respect. In this case, while the attitude of respect retains
the image of the person as its peripheral object, its intentional object shifts
- this not the moral person, but his or her actions.
At this stage, one might wonder where the image of respect originates
from. Stavenhagen contends that, to form this image, the subject must
already be acquainted with the obligations grounded in the moral world
(Achtung, 22). To put this diﬀerently, the subject can form the image of how
another person stands towards those obligations because she already has
an understanding of those obligations. Now, of course, the obligations of
the other are not the subject's obligations. Yet, the subject, in respecting the
other, consciously acknowledges the existence of those obligations that
accrue to him or her while understanding that, if she was to ﬁnd herself in
the same situation of the other person, she would face - and, importantly,
take seriously or be responsible for - the very same obligations.
If that is on the right track, one can draw the following interim conclusion.
When respecting somebody, the subject is pre-reﬂectively given to herself as a
moral person - as somebody who recognises obligations and is thereby dis-
posed to have those obligations determining her course of actions.10 But then,
9But how far can warranted contempt go? This question should be answered in the context of phenom-
enological axiology. Stavenhagen embraces the widespread idea of a mind-independent hierarchy of
values (Scheler, Formalism), which includes vital and spiritual values in their rich taxonomy of values.
These are values that are exempliﬁed by human beings qua living beings and qua persons. So, even
though it is legitimate to feel contempt for some individuals (in light of their disregard of obligations),
Stavenhagen would contend that their spiritual and vital values still demand to be appreciated as such.
This means that warranted contempt is directed only towards a person's speciﬁc traits, but not towards
the whole person as such. (If it were directed towards the whole person, it would be unwarranted pre-
cisely because it would disregard this person's positive values.)
10Analogously, Stavenhagen argues, the subject is pre-reﬂectively aware of her lived-body (Leib) and of the
relations it enters with the environment, which will determine her behaviour (typically in a non-reﬂec-
tive way), see Stavenhagen, Achtung, 22.
1106
A. SALICE

the image that, in respect, the subject forms of the other, concomitantly indi-
cates an image of the subject herself and of how she sees the world and the
obligations that are grounded in the world. All this amount to saying that, in
respect, one ﬁnds oneself and the other sharing the same world of obli-
gations: "respect is to reconcile oneself together with another to a common
moral life facing the world in its entirety" (Achtung, 23).
Just as in the case of cohesive communities, where sharing the same eva-
luative perspective towards the world prompts uniﬁcation, so here is sharing
the same moral perspective a trigger for uniﬁcation. Respect establishes a
common moral life of an 'unilateral' (Stavenhagen qualiﬁes it as 'indirect')
nature: it is unilateral because, in principle, this life can unfold without the
respected person reciprocating the attitude. However, this only is an inter-
mediate step towards the formation of a fully ﬂedged community of
respect, which is not any longer unilateral, but reciprocal.
The next step presupposes the idea that certain social acts require that
their addressees respond to their addressors with acts of a speciﬁc kind. For
instance, Scheler (in line with Reinach, Civil Law, and von Hildebrand, Metaphy-
sik) writes:
[r]eciprocity [Gegenseitigkeit] as well as equipollence [Gegenwertigkeit] [between
certain social acts] is absolutely not based on the contingent reality of these acts,
on speciﬁc persons who execute these acts, or on the presence of real mechan-
isms and factual forms of conveyance in which this reciprocity gains reality. It
rests on the ideal unity of sense of these acts as acts of the essence of love,
respect, promising, giving orders, etc., acts that require as ideal correlates responses
of mutual love, mutual respect, accepting, obeying, etc., in order to form a fact of an
unitary sense.
(Scheler, Formalism, 535f, trans. mod., my italics)
For instance, it lies in the essence of an act of questioning to be met by an act
of answering and the absence of such an answer - failing a plausible expla-
nation on the addressee's end - will cause an "interruption of sense [Sinnun-
terbrechung]" (Stavenhagen, Achtung, 34).
Scheler suggests that respect asks for mutual respect, but he does not elab-
orate further on his intuition. Stavenhagen does. It is precisely because, in
respect, one appreciates the moral stance adopted by the other in facing
his or her obligations that the other, too, is under rational pressure to
respect the subject. The other should appreciate that the subject recognizes
the existence of the obligations she is facing and is also prepared to act on
them, if these accrued to the subject.
Respect, however, is not always met with reciprocal respect (a case
which will cause dismay in the respecting person). But if this happens,
then a 'mutual' (or 'direct') community of respect comes into existence.
Stavenhagen writes:
BRITISH JOURNAL FOR THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY
1107

In line with the essence of respect, the 'subject' and the 'object' ﬁnd themselves
as determined to the ideally same aﬀective and agentive conduct by the same
ethical world. [...] An aidesmatic community of two persons is [...] fully consti-
tuted, when the two communal companions are given to themselves as living in
conformity to the same ethical personal image [als einem gemeinsamen sittlichen
Personbild nachlebend].
(Achtung, 35)
Once a community comes to life on the ground of mutual respect between
two persons, its life can be enriched in two ways.
The ﬁrst occurs when two subjects happen to face one and the same obli-
gation. If the individuals have already formed a community of respect, then
this impacts their experiential life and, more speciﬁcally, the sense of commit-
ment they elicit towards the obligation. Because the two individuals conceive
of themselves as group members, their two numerically diﬀerent episodes of
sense of commitment are now experienced as one or as theirs, collectively.
Not any longer: I face an obligation, which happens to be the same obligation
that you face, but rather: we now face one and the same obligation.
The second is that dyadic communities of respect can grow into commu-
nities with n > 2 members. Suppose that Pam respects Sam. In this case,
Pam faces one and the same moral world together with Sam. Now imagine
that Sam respects Kim. The same can be said about the relation between
Sam and Kim: they, too, face the same moral world. And if Pam comes to
know about Sam's respect for Kim, Pam will respect Kim as well, even
though, perhaps, she never met Kim and never will. Respect for Kim is ration-
ally demanded of Pam: since she shares the same moral world with Sam and
so does Sam with Kim, she should also share it with Kim (and if Kim does not
act upon her obligations as it is expected of her, then Pam and Sam will
experience disappointment). Furthermore, since Pam respects her, so is Kim
under a rational requirement to reciprocate that attitude and, thus, to
respect Pam.
Although the main examples of communities of respect discussed by Sta-
venhagen are medieval and early modern groups like estates of the realm
(Standesgemeinschaften) or guilds, his description can be extended to other
groups as well. Central to communities of respect is the notion of honour:
to being worthy of respect is to have honour. Some features that are attached
to honour are the following (Stavenhagen, Achtung, 43ﬀ). Only honourable
persons can be members of communities of respect. Honourable persons
can be judged only by other honourable persons. Not reacting to (esp.
oﬀensive) behaviour of an honourable person is (itself) oﬀensive. Although
it would exceed the purposes of this paper to further explore this conjecture,
it may be suggested that 'learned societies' like scholarly societies or aca-
demic associations (but also less commendable groups like criminal gangs),
insofar as they are regulated by (explicit or implicit) codes of honour,
1108
A. SALICE

display similar features and could thus be described as communities of
respect.
3.3. (Cultural) nations
Cohesive communities and communities of respect require, at least at their
earliest stages of formation, face-to-face encounters among their members
for the machinery of community building to be set in motion. This presents
a limitation and a problem for any taxonomy of kinds of communities. The
limitation is that human beings often are members of communities with indi-
viduals they will never encounter in their life (Stavenhagen, Wesen, 48f) - con-
sider the existence of the Japanese nation: it would be obviously
presumptuous to stipulate that the existence of that group depends on
face-to-face encounters between its members. However, equally presumptu-
ous would be to deny the existence of such large-scale communities. But then
the problem that arises is to identify the mechanisms that are responsible for
the emergence of communities of this kind.
Large parts of Stavenhagen's 1934 monograph on the essence of nation
are devoted to the dismissal of various attempts at deﬁning the notion of a
(cultural) nation based on objective features. Objective conditions are
neither necessary nor suﬃcient for the existence of a nation. They are not
suﬃcient because individuals with diﬀerent biological features, but also,
say, with diﬀerent passports may nevertheless constitute a nation. They are
not suﬃcient because individuals with the same biological features and/or
with the same institutional memberships may nevertheless not constitute a
nation. The main reason why neither biological nor institutional features are
relevant to nationality is that national communities are spiritual communities:
they require, for their existence, that their members have appropriate mental
attitudes. But then, what are the attitudes that determine memberships to a
nation?
The discussion of the previous subsections suggests that being a member
of a spiritual community is a matter of adopting the same perspective from
which the world is confronted and evaluated. In cohesive communities and
in communities of respect, this common perspective is, in a sense, discovered
by the individuals. That very discovery brings the community about by trans-
forming the self-understanding of the individuals. By contrast, when it comes
to nations, individuals grow into a community of this kind by inheriting their
communal perspective towards the world. Discovering that fact does not
bring about the community, it just makes transparent their group member-
ships to its very members. However, how do individuals inherit that commu-
nal perspective?
To answer this question, Stavenhagen again invokes Husserl's theory of
intentionality and, in particular, the idea that intentional acts require
BRITISH JOURNAL FOR THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY
1109

meanings to be directed towards objects and facts (Husserl, Logische Untersu-
chungen). How exactly the notion of meaning should be spelled out phenom-
enologically remains a matter of debate, but Stavenhagen does not discuss
that problem (and neither do I in this paper). What is more signiﬁcant for
the issue at stake is that, according to Stavenhagen, meanings do not only
fulﬁl a denotative function. More precisely, meanings typically also have eva-
luative content. Terms of natural language usually convey "thick" concepts,
which "express a union of fact and value" (Williams, Ethics, 129). And the eva-
luative component of a thick concept is generally ﬁxed by the linguistic com-
munity the speaker belongs to (Stavenhagen, Wesen, 54ﬀ). From this one can
infer that growing in a linguistic community goes together with inheriting the
system of values that is inherent in that community. Yet, this is not the only (or
the most important) consequence to be drawn. The salience that language
assigns to certain values is ﬁrst and foremost relevant to the individual's
aﬀective life. Stavenhagen here operates within the framework of the phe-
nomenological theory of emotion, according to which emotions respond to
evaluative properties that facts and objects exemplify (Scheler, Formalism;
von Hildebrand, Sittliche Handlung; Mulligan, Emotions and Values).
The established link between values, emotions, and group memberships
allows Stavenhagen to construe the notion of "emotional tradition" (Gefühl-
stradition, see Wesen, 49, 75), which puts the sensitivity towards values fos-
tered by a certain community in a relation with the individuals' emotional
reactions that respond to those values. In passing, that link also shows that,
contrary to what one might be inclined to think, nations do not necessarily
presuppose linguistic communities (although they usually do): what matters
is that the acquired sensitivity towards values generates an emotional
tradition. The ways in which this sensitivity is acquired are manifold
and language is one important - but also only one - way of acquiring it
(Wesen, 81).11
If being part of an emotional tradition is to evaluate the world the way a
community (one's community) does, then individuals, who emote according
to an emotional tradition, de facto are members of a nation.12 Yet, it is impor-
tant to notice that such de facto form of group memberships does not have to
be accompanied by a self-understanding as group member on their members'
ends. In other words, the experiences (especially the emotions) that members
live through because they are members of a community could still be enter-
tained from the members' ﬁrst personal perspective, i.e. without exemplifying
us-ness. This is conducive to a form of self-deception for, in situations like this,
11To put this diﬀerently, it is possible to imagine paradigmatic scenarios—these are scenarios where indi-
viduals learn how to elicit appropriate emotive responses (de Sousa, Rationality)—that do not involve
language.
12These evaluations inform a group ethos (Sitten): these are actions community members ﬁnd (un-)appro-
priate to do or to omit in given circumstances (Stavenhagen, Wesen, 82f).
1110
A. SALICE

an individual's experiential life remains partly opaque to her. This invites the
question as to how an individual can steer clear of that opaqueness.
Stavenhagen argues that, for an individual to discover her memberships to
a cultural nation, is for this individual to acquire a we-idea (Wir-Idee). A we-idea
(sometimes also called "a community's self-consciousness") is a more or less
vague representation that the community has of itself, which is described
as such:
[t]his self-consciousness [...] is the public opinion that the community tradition-
ally has of its own essence. The self-consciousness of a community, e.g. contains
indications on the kind of unity [Einssein] of the community members, on its
foundation, and on that as which 'we' are one.
(Wesen, 26)
And further: "[i]nsofar as the we-idea objectiﬁes the communality [Gemein-
samkeit] given in one's feelings and, as it were, grasped in one's grip, it now
cannot any longer be overlooked or evaporate" (Wesen, 44). So, the we-idea
"entiﬁes" the community (Tuomela, Sociality, 20) by providing indication to
individuals as to what uniﬁes them and makes them members of that commu-
nity. And, in so doing, the we-idea contributes to dissolve the opaqueness that
characterizes the members' experiential life as it enables them to realize that
some of their lived-through experiences have its origin in their group
membership.
It merits attention that acquiring a we-idea is not merely to acquire a dox-
astic (or 'theoretical') representation (a point which is often signalled by the
expression "existential we-idea," Stavenhagen, Wesen, 25f, 61). On the one
hand, a we-idea, by colouring our experience with us-ness, immediately
shapes our conduct or behaviour, e.g. by eliciting pro-social behaviour:
a traditional circle [Traditionskreis] becomes a community if the theoretically
conscious communality [theoretisch bewußte Gemeinsamkeit] of the emotional
life, which relies on an invisible tradition and is experienced as 'naturally,'
becomes an existential communality [existentielle Gemeinsamkeit], that is, [...]
if the individuals subject to a tradition become conscious of the way in which
they, in a traditional and solidary way, love and hate, respect and despise,
rejoice and suﬀer etc.
(Wesen, 59f)
On the other, even though we-ideas can be assessed with respect to
their truth or falsity, what mainly matters from the perspective of social phe-
nomenology is whether they are endorsed or not. For instance, the we-idea
that membership to a particular nation depends on biological features is
patently false because, as seen, nations are spiritual communities, and yet
this is not preclusive for it to operate at the communal level. If endorsed,
that we-idea will shape the members' self-understanding and, by extension,
the nation itself.
BRITISH JOURNAL FOR THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY
1111

This brings Stavenhagen's discussion on the verge of political philosophy:
for a we-idea is at the basis of the institutional organization that a nation gives
to itself. This is why Stavenhagen considers cultural nations to ground state
nations (Wesen, 98ﬀ). It exceeds the purposes of this paper to explore Staven-
hagen's political philosophy, but it may be relevant to conclude this section by
developing some brief considerations on this issue. On the one hand, Staven-
hagen's social philosophy is consistent with, and actually conducive to, a con-
servative form of communitarianism (as this was defended, e.g. by two of his
main philosophical references: Scheler and von Hildebrand). On the other, the
main aim of Stavenhagen's social phenomenology (as this has been recon-
structed in this paper) is to fulﬁl descriptive desiderata and, in particular, to
answer questions related to the psychological pre-conditions of our social
identity. Therefore, it could be claimed that Stavenhagen's answers to those
descriptive questions do not straightforwardly translate into a political pos-
ition. Such a translation necessarily requires further arguments, which this
paper neither scrutinized nor presented.
4. Conclusion
The main purpose of this article was to introduce Stavenhagen's social phe-
nomenology by emphasizing its original aspects against the backdrop of
the debate on we-intentionality in classical phenomenology. These have
been identiﬁed in his particularly detailed description of we-experiences
and, perhaps more importantly, in the diversiﬁed account of kinds of commu-
nities that he developed. Stavenhagen should be credited with the merit of
having unearthed the aggregative, we-generating force of preferences, of
respect, and of emotions. However, these ideas constitute only a limited set
of his contributions and also one that this paper could expose only to the
level of detail adequate to its main purpose.
There are at least two ways in which his thought could be made subject of
further investigations, the pursuit of which will be a task for future research.
First, his positions in social phenomenology are closely connected with
other strands of his research. To fully appreciate Stavenhagen's positions, it
would be important to understand how it relates to his - and his fellow phe-
nomenologists' - descriptive psychology, axiology, and to the theory of
(especially: social) action. Second, the resonances between Stavenhagen's
social phenomenology and certain positions currently debated in social phil-
osophy will appear as particularly striking to everybody familiar with contem-
porary discussions, to mention but few: Gilbert's theory of joint commitments
(Joint Commitment), Helm's view about communities of respect (Communities
of Respect), or Zahavi's investigations into social identity (Self and Other). How
Stavenhagen can contribute to these debates is a page of phenomenology
that still has to be written.
1112
A. SALICE

Acknowledgments
I am grateful to Jason Dockstader, Danny Forde, Jamie Murphy, and Dan Zahavi for
their comments on previous drafts of this paper. My gratitude also goes to Saulius Gen-
iusas, Kevin Mulligan, and Genki Uemura for helping me retrieve Stavenhagen's
publications.
References
Bratman, Michael. Shared Agency. A Planning Theory of Acting Together. Oxford: OUP,
2014.
Chalmers, David. "The Representational Character of Experience". In The Future for
Philosophy, edited by B. Leiter, 153-81. Oxford: OUP, 2004.
Darwall, Stephen. The Second-person Standpoint. Morality, Respect, and Accountability.
Cambridge: HUP, 2006.
Darwall, Stephen. "Kant on Respect, Dignity, and the Duty of Respect". In Honor, History,
and Relationship. Essays in Second-personal Ethics II, edited by S. Darwall, 247-70.
Oxford: OUP, 2013.
de Sousa, Ronald. The Rationality of Emotions. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1990.
Gilbert, Margaret. Joint Commitment. How We Make the Social World. Oxford: OUP, 2014.
Gold, Nathalie, and Robert Sugden. "Collective Intentions and Team Agency". The
Journal of Philosophy 104, no. 3 (2007): 109-37.
Gombocz, Wolfgang, and Alessandro Salice. "Edith Steins soziale Ontologie auf
Grund ihrer Staatsschrift". Aufgang. Jahrbuch für Denken, Dichten, Musik 3 (2006):
436-56.
Helm, Bennett. Communities of Respect. Grounding Responsibility, Authority, and Dignity.
Oxford: OUP, 2017.
Hogg, Michael, and Dominic Abrams. Social Identiﬁcations. London: Routledge, 1998.
Husserl, Edmund. "Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und Phänomenologischen
Philosophie". In Husserliana III/1, edited by K. Schuhmann, 3-470. Den Haag:
Nijhoﬀ, 1976.
Husserl, Edmund. Logische Unterschungen, in 2 Bänden. Husserliana XIX 1, 2. Den Haag:
Nijhoﬀ, 1984.
León, Felipe, and Dan Zahavi. "Phenomenology of Experiential Sharing: The
Contribution of Schutz and Walther". In The Phenomenological Approach to Social
Reality, edited by A. Salice and H.B. Schmid, 219-36. Dordrecht: Springer, 2016.
León, Felipe. "Autism, Social Connectedness, and Minimal Social Acts". Adaptive
Behavior 27, no. 1 (2019): 75-89.
List, Christian, and Philip Pettit. Group Agency. The Possibility, Design, and Status of
Corporate Agents. Oxford: OUP, 2011.
Michael, John, Nathalie Sebanz, and Günther Knoblich. "The Sense of Commitment. A
Minimal Approach". Frontiers in Psychology (2016). doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01968.
Millikan, Ruth. Varieties of Meaning: The 2002 Jean Nicod Lectures. Cambridge: MIT Press,
2004.
Mulligan, Kevin. "Emotions and Values". In The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of
Emotion, edited by P. Goldie, 475-500. Oxford: OUP, 2010.
Pacherie, Elizabeth. "Intentional Joint Agency: Shared Intention Lite". Synthese 190
(2013): 1817-39.
Reinach, Adolf. "The A Priori Foundations of the Civil Law". In The A Priori Foundations of
the Civil Law, edited by J. Crosby, 1-142. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2012.
BRITISH JOURNAL FOR THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY
1113

Rozenvalds, Juris. "Phenomenological Ideas in Latvia: Kurt Stavenhagen and Theodor
Celms on Husserl's Transcendental Phenomenology". In Phenomenology on Kant,
German Idealism, Hermeneutics and Logic. Philosophical Essays in Honor of Thomas
M. Seebohm, edited by O. K. Wiegand, et al., 67-82. Dordrecht: Springer, 2000.
Salice, Alessandro. "The Phenomenology of the Munich and Göttingen Circles". In The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, edited by E. Zalta, 2015. http://plato.stanford.
edu/archives/win2015/entries/phenomenology-mg/.
Salice, Alessandro. "Collective Intentionality and the Collective Person in Max Scheler".
In Analytical and Continental Philosophy: Methods and Perspectives, edited by S.
Rinofner and H. Wiltsche, 277-88. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2016.
Salice, Alessandro. "Communities and Values: Dietrich von Hildebrand's Social
Ontology". In The Phenomenological Approach to Social Reality, edited by A. Salice
and H.B. Schmid, 237-58. Dordrecht: Springer, 2016.
Salice, Alessandro. "Kurt Stavenhagen and the Phenomenology of the We". In Empathy,
Sociality, and Personhood. Essays on Edith Stein's Phenomenological Investigations,
edited by D. Moran and E. Magri, 179-92. Dordrecht: Springer, 2018.
Salice, Alessandro, and Kengo Miyazono. "Being one of us. Group Identiﬁcation, Joint
Actions, and Collective Intentionality". Philosophical Psychology 33, no. 1 (2019): 42-63.
Salice, Alessandro, and Schmid Hans Bernhard, eds. The Phenomenological Approach to
Social Reality. History, Concepts, Problems. Dordrecht: Springer, 2016.
Salice, Alessandro, and Genki Uemura. "Social Acts and Communities: Walther Between
Husserl and Reinach". In Gerda Walther's Phenomenology of Sociality, Psychology, and
Religion, edited by A. Calcagno, 27-46. Dordrecht: Springer, 2018.
Scheler, Max. Formalism in Ethics and Non-formal Ethics of Values. A New Attempt
Toward
the
Foundation
of
an
Ethical
Personalism.
Evanston:
Northwestern
University Press, 1973.
Scheler, Max. The Nature of Sympathy. London: Routledge, 2008.
Schloßberger, Matthias. "The Varieties of Togetherness: Scheler on Collective Aﬀective
Intentionality". In The Phenomenological Approach to Social Reality. History, Concepts,
Problems, edited by A. Salice and H.B. Schmid, 173-96. Dordrecht: Springer, 2016.
Schmid, Hans Bernhard. "The Subject of 'We Intend'". Phenomenology and the Cognitive
Sciences 17 (2018): 231-43.
Searle, John. Intentionality. Cambridge: CUP, 1983.
Searle, John. "Collective Intentions and Actions". In Consciousness and Language, edited
by J. Searle. 90-105. Cambridge: CUP, 2002.
Searle, John. Making the Social World. The Structure of Human Civilization. Oxford: OUP,
2010.
Spiegelberg, Herbert. The Phenomenological Movement. 2nd ed. The Hague: Martinus
Nijhoﬀ, 1965.
Stavenhagen, Kurt. Absolute Stellungnahmen. Eine Ontologische Untersuchung über das
Wesen der Religion. Erlangen: Verlag der Philosophischen Akademie, 1925.
Stavenhagen, Kurt. Achtung als Solidaritätsgefühl und Grundlage von Gemeinschaften.
Riga: Verlag der Buchhandlung G. Löﬄer, 1931.
Stavenhagen,
Kurt.
"Chauvinismus
und
verwandte
Erscheinungen".
Baltische
Monatshefte 7-8 (1932): 369-80.
Stavenhagen, Kurt. "Charimastische Persönlichkeitseinungen". In Neue Münchener
Philosophische Abhandlungen, edited by E. Heller and F. Löw, 36-68. Leipzig:
Barth, 1933.
Stavenhagen, Kurt. Das Wesen der Nation. Berlin: Verlag von Hans Robert Engelmann,
1934.
1114
A. SALICE

Stavenhagen, Kurt. Kritische Gänge in die Volkstheorie. Riga: Verlag der Akt.-Ges. Ernst
Plates, 1936.
Stavenhagen, Kurt. Heimat als Lebenssinn. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Rupercht, 1948.
Stavenhagen, Kurt. Kant und Königsberg. Göttingen: Deuerlich, 1949.
Stavenhagen, Kurt. Person und Persönlichkeit. Untersuchungen zur Anthropologie und
Ethik. Aus dem Nachlass hrsg. v. H. Delius. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1957.
Stein, Edith. Philosophy of Psychology and the Humanities. The Collected Works of Edith
Stein. Vol. 7. Washington: ICS Pubns, 2000.
Szanto, Thomas. "Collective Emotions, Normativity, and Empathy: A Steinian Account".
Human Studies 38, no. 4 (2015): 503-27.
Szanto, Thomas. "Husserl on Collective Intentionality". In The Phenomenological
Approach to Social Reality. History, Concepts, Problems, edited by A. Salice and H.B.
Schmid, 145-72. Dordrecht: Springer, 2016.
Szanto, Thomas, and Moran Dermot, eds. The Phenomenology of Sociality. Discovering
the "We.". London: Routledge, 2016.
Thomasson, Amie. "The Ontology of Social Groups". Synthese. doi:10.1007/s11229-016-
1185-y.
Tilitzki, Christian. Die deutsche Universitätsphilosophie in der Weimarer Republik und im
Dritten Reich, Teil 2. Berlin: Akademie, 2002.
Tönnies, Ferdinand. Gemeinschaft und Gesellschaft. Grundbegriﬀe der reinen Soziologie.
Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 2005.
Tomasello, Michael. A Natural History of Human Thinking. HUP: Cambridge, 2014.
Tomasello, Michael. "The Moral Psychology of Obligation". Behavioral and Brain
Sciences (2019). doi:10.1017/S0140525X19001742.
Tuomela, Raimo. The Philosophy of Sociality. The Shared Point of View. Oxford: OUP, 2007.
Vendrell Ferran, Íngrid. "Empathy, Emotional Sharing and Feelings in Stein's Early
Work". Human Studies 38, no. 4 (2015): 481-502.
von Hildebrand, Dietrich. "Die Idee von der sittlichen Handlung". In Die Idee von der sit-
tlichen Handlung. Sittlichkeit und ethische Werterkenntnis, edited by K. Martens, 1-
126. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1969.
von Hildebrand, Dietrich. Die Metaphysik der Gemeinschaft. Untersuchungen über Wesen
und Wert der Gemeinschaft. Regensburg: Josef Habbel, 1955.
Walther, Gerda. "Zur Ontologie der sozialen Gemeinschaften". Jahrbuch für Philosophie
und Phänomenologische Forschung 6 (1923): 1-158.
Weber, Max. Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft. Grundriss der Verstehenden Soziologie.
Frankfurt: Zweitausendeins, 2010.
Williams, Bernard. Ethics and the Limits of Philosophy. London: Routledge, 2006.
Zahavi, Dan, and Kriegel Uriah. "For-me-ness: What It Is and What It Is Not". In
Philosophy of Mind and Phenomenology: Conceptual and Empirical Approaches,
edited by D.O. Dahlstron, A. Elpiderou, and W. Hopp, 36-53. London: Routledge,
2015.
Zahavi, Dan. "Empathy and Other-directed Intentionality". Topoi 33, no. 1 (2014):
129-42.
Zahavi, Dan. Self and Other. Exploring Subjectivity, Empathy, and Shame. Oxford: OUP,
2014.
Zahavi, Dan. "Second-person Engagement, Self-alienation, and Group-identiﬁcation".
Topoi 38, no. 1 (2019): 251-60.
Zahavi, Dan, and Alessandro Salice. "Phenomenology of the We: Stein, Walther,
Gurwitsch". In Routledge Handbook of Philosophy of Social Mind, edited by J.
Kiverstein, 515-27. London: Routledge, 2016.
BRITISH JOURNAL FOR THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY
1115

