Sport, Ethics and Philosophy
ISSN: 1751-1321 (Print) 1751-133X (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rsep20
Eichberg's 'Phenomenology' of Sport: A
Phenomenal Confusion
Irena Martínková & Jim Parry
To cite this article: Irena Martínková & Jim Parry (2013) Eichberg's 'Phenomenology'
of Sport: A Phenomenal Confusion, Sport, Ethics and Philosophy, 7:3, 331-341, DOI:
10.1080/17511321.2013.831116
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/17511321.2013.831116
Published online: 16 Sep 2013.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 466
View related articles 
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rsep20

EICHBERG'S 'PHENOMENOLOGY' OF
SPORT: A PHENOMENAL CONFUSION
Irena Martı´nkova´ and Jim Parry
This paper defends philosophical phenomenology against a hostile review in the previous issue
of this journal. It tries to explain what philosophical phenomenology is, and the possibilities for
its empirical application; whilst also showing that Eichberg's method is idiosyncratic, problematic
and not interested in philosophical phenomenology at all. It presents the phenomenological
concept of phenomenon, which is neither concrete nor abstract, and contrasts it to Eichberg's
understanding of empirical concrete phenomena. Finally, the paper scrutinises Eichberg's
empirical method, which has deep problems of its own, and in any case, finds unsuitable its
characterisation as 'phenomenology'.
KEYWORDS
phenomenology; phenomenon; philosophy; empirical; method
Introduction
People disagree over what philosophy is, and as to what constitutes philosophical
method. The same is true of any branch of philosophy, so we can expect differing inter-
pretations and 'readings' of, say, phenomenological philosophy, and differing assessments
of the possibilities for its application. We think that it is fruitful to explore these differing
approaches, and to assess the possibilities for their application to sport, and we think that
this is a proper and useful contribution to the philosophy of sport.
According to Jerzy Kosiewicz's assessment, Henning Eichberg takes a 'nihilistic'
view on the philosophy of sport--the view that any philosophical reflection on sport is
unnecessary: '... it is proclaimed that there are fields which may do without philosophy
and which do not need philosophy ... They allegedly include physical activity, activity in
the field of physical culture. That view is proclaimed and supported by, among others:
Henning Eichberg ...' (Kosiewicz 2009, 83-4).
If this is indeed so, then it is unsurprising that Eichberg also takes the view that a
book on the philosophy of sport is a waste of time and paper. And so, in his review of
the special issue of Sport, Ethics and Philosophy called An Introduction to the Phenomeno-
logical Study of Sport (2011b)--also published as a book Phenomenological Approaches to
Sport (2012)--he has chosen to focus more on an extended presentation of his own posi-
tion, already set out in his book Bodily Democracy (2009a), rather than to offer a detailed
critical exposition of the former. His position is, in short, that we (phenomenologists of
Sport, Ethics and Philosophy, 2013
Vol. 7, No. 3, 331-341, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17511321.2013.831116
 2013 Taylor & Francis

sport) should all be doing 'bottom-up' empirical historico-anthropology, just like
Eichberg, rather than trying to grasp the insights of phenomenological philosophers for
what he calls a 'top-down' study of sport.
However, confusingly, it appears that Eichberg wishes to reserve the word
'phenomenology' to describe something like his own empirical methodology. Yet, in
contrast, it is striking how many meanings the word 'phenomenology' has taken on in
recent literature across various disciplines. One of our central concerns in the introduction
to the special issue (2011a, 191ff) was to give reasons why some claims by authors to be
doing phenomenology were unjustified. Our review argued that these unjustified claims
arose especially in the empirical disciplines, some of which (in one way or another)
claimed allegiance to philosophical phenomenology, while their research was of a quite
different kind. Obviously, confusion is likely to arise if one disciplinary label covers a vari-
ety of vastly different approaches; and the problem is only exacerbated when it is sup-
posed to cover what are essentially different discourses, such as philosophical scholarship
in contrast to empirical research.
From the very beginning of his review, it is clear that Eichberg has no sympathy
for philosophical phenomenology. He suggests that the label of phenomenology be
applied to his empirical enterprise, which investigates 'concrete phenomena'. He does
not refer to our refutation of this manoeuvre, either in explanation of our position, or in
opposition to it. So, we think that we have to clarify the confusion here, and to
distinguish between phenomenology as philosophy and the empirical study of
phenomena, and the value of the former for the latter.
Eichberg and Non-phenomenology
Eichberg certainly has a penchant for the words 'phenomena', 'phenomenology'
and cognates to the extent of using them four times in the title of his 'review'. Chapters
7, 8 and 10 of his book (2009a) also include the word in the title. In Chapter 10, the
'phenomenology of laughter' turns out to be a set of descriptions of the various forms
that laughter may take in different cultures and practices. These are interesting and
engaging descriptions (we have nothing against good anthropology!), but since the
chapter does not aspire to anything more or other than the comparison of concrete
phenomena, there is nothing about it that can be called 'phenomenological'--it merely
describes empirical phenomena.
Here are some other attempts by Eichberg to explain the 'phenomenological'
character of his work. In an earlier article (2009b, 210), Eichberg makes it clear that what
he means by 'bodily phenomenology' is simply 'personal experiences'. Later, he
introduces the term 'inter-subjective phenomenology' (2011, 64), which turns out to be
a 'sharing of experiences and observations'--a comparison of concrete particulars.
However, we say again: whatever kind of 'knowledge' can emerge from this procedure,
there is nothing about it that can be called 'phenomenological'--it is merely the
comparison of the concrete phenomena of various personal experiences.
In his book, Eichberg discerns three kinds of 'phenomenology' (2009a, 456-7, in the
journal-issues version). The first, monistic phenomenology, asserts that 'all is X', where X
is for Heraclitus 'flow', for Descartes 'reason', for Darwin 'struggle', for Marx 'work', for
Freud 'sexuality' and so on. So all of these authors, and many others, are seen as
phenomenologists. However, in the absence of a rationale to support the assembling of
332
IRENA MARTI´NKOVA´ AND JIM PARRY

such a disparate set of authors as all 'phenomenologists', their sheer diversity and
incommensurability are sufficient to discredit this classification from the outset. Secondly,
he identifies 'polemical phenomenology', which is dualistic and critical (play vs. sport;
nature vs. the built environment; laughter vs. seriousness; etc.), but no philosophers are
cited who might instantiate this approach. Finally, we arrive at the 'differential phenome-
nology' of Eichberg himself, which, after collecting various concrete examples, is able to
discover complex differences, which enable us to 'differentiate' heterogeneous sport and
games, and compare various cultures and practices. Eichberg's aim, in assembling these
examples, is to remind us (lest we forget) that sport is not one thing, but many (2009a,
457-8). So far, so good. But, where is the phenomenology in all of this?
Let us repeat that we have no objection in principle to empirical enquires of an
historical, sociological, anthropological or political nature. The task of empirical
researchers is to extend our knowledge and understanding with rich, critical and thick
descriptions, as well as to develop explanatory theories. We read them with relish and
value their contribution to our understanding. But, theirs is not the only game in town.
There is also philosophy. We contend that Eichberg misunderstands the works of the
major philosophical phenomenologists--in at least three senses:
(1)
Phenomenology is not an empirical discipline. It is not a method for the study
of 'concrete phenomena', but rather a descriptive philosophy.
(2)
'Phenomena' do not exist as concrete entities, but are always correlated to our per-
ceptions and experiences, that is, to us as subjects. This is why phenomenology
foregrounds an analysis of the experiencing human subject.
(3)
Phenomenology
does
not
construct
abstract
theories.
Phenomenological
phenomena are not abstract.
We turn now to a clarification of these three points in more detail, before going
on to discuss Eichberg's description of his own kind of 'phenomenology' (4).
(1) Phenomenology as philosophy
Throughout the whole of Eichberg's essay, we can see his claim that phenomenol-
ogy is an empirical method--for example, see his criticism that one finds very few concrete
phenomena in the special issue (2013, 271). Moreover, the essay is replete with criticisms
of philosophers (phenomenologists) for doing phenomenological philosophy. Eichberg
does this from a position of seeming ignorance as to what actually constitutes philosophy,
which is usually characterised as a non-empirical discipline. In many derisory (yet
ill-explained) phrases, Eichberg denigrates phenomenological philosophy--Heidegger is
'dada-ist' (277), Patocˇka is 'homespun', (273) and so on. Yet, Eichberg shows no under-
standing of its central concerns and methods, nor of its contribution to our understanding
of the human being. In short, phenomenological philosophy attempts a clarification of
how we experience, describing the structures of our common experiencing from a first-
person point of view. The point of doing this is to elucidate an understanding of how we
are as human beings, without which there would be nothing to which concrete phenom-
ena could correlate. That is to say: with no such philosophical account (i.e. of what a
human being is, and how we experience the world), it is difficult to see how concrete
phenomena can be adequately comprehended at all.
A PHENOMENAL CONFUSION
333

The insights of phenomenology are also valuable beyond itself, within other
philosophical areas, such as analytical philosophy (e.g. Gallagher 2008; Zahavi 2002); as
well as in other disciplines, such as psychotherapy (Laing 1960, 1967), archaeology
(Hamilton et al. 2000) and cognitive science (Gallagher and Schmicking 2010); and also
in the areas of, for example sport psychology (Nesti 2011) and sport sociology (Allen-
Collinson 2011). It is also presently generally agreed amongst empirical researchers that
phenomenological philosophy is the primary source of other kinds of research that call
themselves by the same name (e.g. Smith 2011), and as such a primary source of its
empirical applications (Finlay 2009). There is a good reason behind this: philosophical
phenomenology has brought many insights that are interesting and fruitful for other
disciplines--such as, for example, one version of the first-person view, the correlation of
phenomena with consciousness, the concept of the life-world, etc.
Eichberg ignores such empirical applications of philosophical phenomenology.
Worse, he sneers at the philosophers regarded as foundational by such empirical
researchers, whilst still wishing to abrogate unto himself something called 'phenomenol-
ogy'. In this respect, Eichberg differs from many other researchers who wish to apply
phenomenology for the purposes of empirical research and who consider important the
connection to philosophical phenomenology, despite the problems entailed in applying
philosophical phenomenology to empirical subject matter. Finlay (2009, 8), for example,
discusses the various methods within empirical science that bear the name of phenome-
nology: 'In my view, a phenomenological method is sound if it links appropriately to
some phenomenological philosophy or theory, and if its claims about method are
justified and consistent'. Eichberg does not follow this route. Indeed, he condemns it as
'scholastic'. Instead, he shapes his own 'phenomenology' after authors who are not
nowadays connected to philosophical phenomenology at all--such as Goethe and
Bachelard--while adding Buber and Husserl without any reason or reference. The end
result is that it is not at all clear how these various authors are connected to each other,
or to what he calls 'phenomenology'.
Our position is more inclusive. In terms of philosophical phenomenology and its
empirical applications, we do not argue for the exclusion of one approach at the
expense of another. Our chapter (Martı´nkova´ and Parry 2011a) is not aimed against the
possibility of phenomenology inspiring empirical research. Rather, we tried to show the
ways in which the relationship between the two can be problematic, and how it
requires the kind of clarification that is possible only with knowledge of both
philosophical phenomenology and empirical research methods. And, as Finlay (2009)
shows in her paper on phenomenological research methods, there is confusion with
respect to what these methods really are. This is not surprising given the variety of
methods within phenomenology itself.
Eichberg wants to say that 'scholastic' phenomenology (by which he means the
consideration of the works of phenomenology as written by its major authors) imposes a
monolithic and authoritarian view of phenomenology. Problematically, he then accuses
the scholastics of engaging in 'sectarian disputes'. Both accusations could not in principle
be true since they are in (at least prima facie) contradiction. Yet, neither accusation is
true, and the very title of our collection promises ample evidence of the variety of
approaches that might be taken. As Finlay (2009, 6) says, the diversity of philosophical
phenomenology: '... finds reflection in phenomenological research, where the application
of philosophical
ideas
to the
empirical
project provokes
both
uncertainty
and
334
IRENA MARTI´NKOVA´ AND JIM PARRY

controversy'. Probably, the best way of devising research methods inspired by
phenomenology is for phenomenological philosophers to work together with researchers
to discuss possibilities of application.
Phenomenological philosophy has contributed a new view of the human being,
and this has provided a fresh perspective for empirical researchers, especially in those
fields that inevitably work with some (implicit or explicit) conception of the human. One
problem with 'phenomenological research methods', however, is that they often do not
recognise and mark the appropriate distinctions between the philosophical and empirical
elements. This is a recipe for confusion. As Zahavi (2010, 14) notes: 'It is important to
encourage the exchange between phenomenology and empirical science, but the
possibility of a fruitful cooperation between the two should not make us deny their
difference'.
(2) Phenomenological Phenomenon--not a concrete phenomenon
We think that the primary misunderstanding of Eichberg arises from his specifically
non-phenomenological use of the concept of 'phenomenon'. Eichberg (2013, 274) states:
'Phenomena are concrete. This demands concreteness also in description and comparison
... Only on the basis of such concreteness, can the phenomenologist turn towards philos-
ophies, which can be selected as useful for understanding'. He backs up this position with
Husserl's (2001, 168) well-known motto--'Back to the things themselves!'
It is true that this motto of Husserl, which seems to be the only link of Eichberg
to philosophical phenomenology, is somewhat misleading when taken out of its
phenomenological context. If used without further understanding of what Husserl
thinks a 'phenomenon' is, one might be misled towards the conclusion that Husserl is
suggesting that we should be examining 'concrete' phenomena. Yet, nothing could be
further from the truth.
Of course, we can focus on a concrete phenomenon, such as, for example, laughter
in sport (Eichberg 2013, 286ff) and describe it. A concrete phenomenon can be described
in a variety of ways, and this is the task of the human sciences. It is crucial to observe,
however, that no such description would constitute a phenomenological description,
which
describes
the
phenomenon-as-experienced,
as
opposed
to
the
'concrete'
phenomenon existing on its own.
A basic assumption of phenomenology is that every concrete phenomenon
appears in a specific way to someone who experiences it; and it is a description of this
'appearing' that is the basic task of phenomenology. So, 'phenomenological phenomena'
(Heidegger 2001) are not simply concrete appearances. They rather appear to us as 'the
experiencing together with the experienced'. This is an elementary and basic understand-
ing of the idea of a phenomenon, which can be found in every introductory book on
phenomenology. A clear account of this is given in Cerbone (2006, 3):
The word 'phenomenology' means 'the study of phenomena', where the notion of a phe-
nomenon coincides, roughly, with the notion of experience. Thus, to attend to experience
rather than what is experienced is to attend to the phenomena ... (Although phenome-
nology asks us to concentrate on experience, on how things 'appear' to us, to remain
faithful to the character of that experience, we must not neglect or distort the idea that
such 'appearances' are largely appearances of things).
A PHENOMENAL CONFUSION
335

To think that 'phenomenology' deals with phenomena as purely 'concrete', independently
existing phenomena, without discussing the way in which they manifest to the subject,
presupposes an extremely problematic reduction of what 'appearance' means, and thus
of who we are as human beings. This is a fundamental misunderstanding of the way in
which phenomenological enquiry proceeds.
Let us repeat, however, that we have nothing against empirical disciplines that
seek to provide descriptions of concrete phenomena--we read sociology, politics and
anthropology for the kind of insights that these disciplines provide. Phenomenology,
and other branches of philosophy, does not set out to do the same job--the insights
they provide are of a completely different character.
(3) Phenomenological Phenomenon--not an abstract phenomenon
So, phenomenological phenomena are not concrete phenomena (in Eichberg's
sense)--but neither are they abstract phenomena. The binary distinction does not apply
here. Phenomenological phenomena are discovered through an examination of our
experiencing, and the description of this experiencing constitutes a phenomenological
description. This is no abstraction, but an effort to describe our very experiencing--and
there is nothing more basic than this to an understanding of ourselves and of things in
the world.
Maybe, the phenomenologists have not yet arrived at adequate or appropriate
descriptions of our experiencing, but it should at least be acknowledged that this is
what they have attempted. Furthermore, the reader of Husserl or Heidegger can assess
the adequacy of their attempts by comparing their descriptions with his or her own.
For example, 'Being-in-the-world' is not an abstract theory, but rather the reader can
personally check whether it resonates with his or her own experiencing: 'Yes, I am not a
finished and enclosed concrete entity, but rather I am "open" to what we call the
world'. No phenomenological description should be abstract, but should be verifiable
by the experiencing of other human beings. Since such accounts are presented as
'universal' ('this is what we are all like, as human beings'), this ensures that they are
testable against each individual's personal experience. That is to say, when offered
some account of how a thing is presented to us in experience, we can each of us ask
ourselves: 'Does this resonate with my experience?' In this way, such accounts are
meant to refer to the experience of each and all of us as humans. If the given account
by a particular philosopher does not resonate with ours, it is up to us to challenge it,
and to offer an improved theory. This is the task of philosophy.
So, when Eichberg criticises our collection for drawing on the 'abstract' theories
of famous phenomenologists, he once again shows a fundamental misunderstanding of
the nature of phenomenology. There is not a hint in Eichberg's essay of his being
interested in (or concerned with) this philosophical phenomenological approach. Rather,
the many references to uses of the word 'phenomenon' with respect to empirical
phenomena (such as in the work of Goethe) are testaments to the fact that Eichberg is
centrally concerned with his own musings, rather than with the disciplinary content of
the collection he set out to review. His own methodological approach seems to require
a mere description and comparison of 'concrete phenomena'. To what extent is this an
admirable aim for philosophers or students of sport? We therefore now turn to a critical
examination of his proposed method.
336
IRENA MARTI´NKOVA´ AND JIM PARRY

(4) The method of Eichberg's 'phenomenology' examined
Phenomenology derives its theories from experiences--and that is what makes it dif-
ferent from analytical philosophy. What makes it different from empirical science, such as
anthropology, is that it does not derive theories from data collection from various people
or peoples, but rather from human experiencing--from the human experiencing of
entities, and the way in which they manifest to us, which is the basis for describing 'things
in the world'.
Yet, Eichberg suggests a completely different approach, which begins with
empirical data. These are what he calls the 'typical steps' of his 'phenomenological
method' (Eichberg 2013, 274-5):
(1)
The researcher selects an interesting case and tells a 'good story', best as thick
description.
(2)
Then, the researcher will wonder about the phenomenon as some of its aspects
may be difficult to understand. Astonished questions arise. (emphasis added)
(3)
A suitable way will be comparison. Another case casts light on the initially
selected case.
(4)
The material from these descriptions and comparisons can be analysed with
reference to existing philosophies, which one selects on the basis of the
phenomenological material as useful for understanding.
Astonished questions do indeed arise for us. First, in what way is this a typical
approach? No references to other such 'phenomenologists' are given. This is definitely
not an approach of philosophical phenomenology, so of whom is this a typical approach?
It seems to us very idiosyncratic. Secondly, it is obvious from these four steps that
Eichberg is not interested in human experience, but rather in empirical description
(giving a 'good story') of something that is found. But, what counts as a good story? Who
decides, and according to what criteria, that some story is good or not? Who 'selects' the
case, and decides that it is 'interesting'? Thirdly, comparison with what, and to what end?
Is there necessarily inherent value in comparative methods here? Fourthly, does the
method, after all, rely on 'abstract theories' for the explanation of a phenomenon? What
is the measure of 'usefulness' here?
Even outside of the phenomenological tradition, the method described by Eichberg
runs into difficulties. On his account, we begin by collecting facts, and then 'select' some
theory that might be useful for understanding the facts. This assumes that 'concrete'
phenomena (for which, we think, we can read 'facts') are sitting out there in the world,
rather like lumps of ... well ... concrete, for the researcher to discover, independently of
any theory or ideology that the researcher might bring to them.
This stance presupposes some important, and unacceptable, epistemological
assumptions. Notably, it embodies an elementary positivist fallacy, discussed in every
introduction to the philosophy of science, raising the well-known problem of the theory
dependence of observation. (Parry 2005, 23-4) The simple idea here is that we can only
discover 'facts' under the umbrella of some theory--so that it is theory that necessarily
comes first, not fact collection. All scientific observation occurs within a theory.
This is why phenomenological philosophy has been such an important develop-
ment of the twentieth century--it is a movement that has generated a set of theories
A PHENOMENAL CONFUSION
337

that develop a new conception of the human being, which enables the development of
new research questions that in turn open up new possibilities for empirical enquiry.
Without the theory, there is nothing to guide fact collection.
The wrong way to see this, however, is to see it as 'top-down' philosophising. The
whole process of phenomenology is driven by a bottom-up understanding of the
human being, since it begins with the very basis of all of our experiencing (e.g. our
perceptions) and with explanations of how this experiencing is the basis of all of our
concepts. From this perspective, Eichberg's 'bottom-up' method does not get to the
bottom at all. As Sokolowski says (2000, 53): '... phenomenology as a science ... is in
fact a more concrete science than any of the partial sciences'. And so, '... phenomenol-
ogy is the most concrete of the sciences. It recovers the wider whole, the greater
context' (2000, 54).
Eichberg's method is an example of what Popper calls the discredited 'traditional
method' of doing science (Parry 2005, 22-6). What Eichberg's method gives us is a set
of disparate stories about some concrete phenomena, collected by a good storyteller.
Then, by some unexplained process, "comparisons" occur to the curious investiga-
tor--one story casts light on another. Then, by another unexplained process, the
researcher 'selects' a theory from those available on the shelf, on the basis of whether
it looks as though it might be 'useful' towards understanding the concrete phenomena.
Further questions now arise, such as: who has created these theories, to which he
now finally appeals? Presumably, not other Eichbergs, who are too busy collecting and
comparing concrete examples 'atheoretically'. Where do these 'theories' come from, and
by what processes are they given to us?
And further: do we really believe that Eichberg (alone of all social researchers)
begins his task with no theoretical orientation, and no social and political theory as his
research context? Of course not--he is clearly as situated and as theorised as the rest of
us, as evidenced by his commitments to the study of 'folk' and village culture (rather
than modern, urban, forms of sport), and to particular concepts of 'sport' and 'sport for
all'. His findings only make sense within his overall project, which both embodies
philosophical ideas and theories from the start, and relies on philosophical ideas and
theories to analyse and understand his empirical material.
Eichberg's Questions, and Some Answers
Finally, we address some issues directly raised by Eichberg. Firstly, he asks: is
phenomenology a method or a philosophy (i.e. a content). This question is posed in
dyadic form. Our answer is: neither. All "philosophies" are both. All philosophies
propose a method for discovering content.
Secondly, there is another dyadic question: back to the phenomena or to the
phenomenologists? Our answer is: you cannot do one without the other. Since the
contents are arrived at by the method, it is the method of the phenomenologist (and
there are many different phenomenologists and many different methods) that describes
the phenomena. So, when Husserl says: 'Back to the things themselves!' he did not
mean 'back to the concrete phenomena'; but rather 'back to the phenomenological
phenomena'--to the phenomena that are revealed by his phenomenological method.
Thirdly, it is suggested that phenomenology is the only alternative to positivist
reductionism. We think that this is false--positivism in the human sciences has been
338
IRENA MARTI´NKOVA´ AND JIM PARRY

opposed, or perhaps we should rather say supplemented, by various attempts to
introduce an 'understanding' of both social actors and social action. Most of these
attempts have not styled themselves as remotely 'phenomenological', and the phenome-
nological approach is usually seen in social/human science textbooks as just one amongst
many approaches to the understanding of the human being and of social action. Indeed,
it is often regarded as the least well-developed and the most theoretically suspect of the
alternatives to hand. So-called 'empirical phenomenology' (which at least tries to take
phenomenology seriously) is having a hard time arriving at a satisfactory description of
itself, never mind a justification of its methodology (Martı´nkova´ and Parry 2011a,
197-200).
Conclusion
If anyone who studies anything that can be called a 'phenomenon' is a phenome-
nologist, then we are all phenomenologists. Used so uncritically, the word loses its mean-
ing. And, if everyone makes his own phenomenology (as Eichberg does), then that
phenomenology might be just anything at all. But, why on earth does the label have such
a hold?--why is it that Eichberg wants to call what he does a kind of phenomenology?
Our line is that it is best to try to avoid confusion in the face of multiple and
potentially contested meanings. There is a clear set of meanings, contested within fairly
well-understood limits, of what counts as within the phenomenological tradition. Of
course, there will be the usual borderline disputes (is a whale a fish, a mammal, both,
or what?), but central understandings should remain--most fish are indisputably fish. To
call research 'phenomenological' is not merely a description--it is also constitutes a
claim that requires substantiation. Anyone claiming to do phenomenology should be
able to say clearly why his research counts as phenomenological. Such a claim is part of
his research methodology, and should be as available for inspection as the empirical
data. The simple fact that one collects and studies 'concrete phenomena' is not only
risibly inadequate; it is rather a self-disqualification--in sporting terms, an own-goal. The
admission that one is simply a concrete phenomenon collector is a self-description as a
non-phenomenologist.
One of our concerns in the collection under review was to expose phenomeno-
logical
flag
waving--the
mere
parading
of
the
names
of
Husserl,
Heidegger,
Merleau-Ponty and others to support a research approach (as some empirical scientists
do), and the mere use of the word 'phenomenology' to dignify their enquiries, without
justification. We say that they are doing phenomenology without any phenomenology
(just as Eichberg does). For us, however, he is part of the problem, and his proposals
are no part of the solution.
It would be unfair to blame Eichberg for not being a philosopher and, of course,
no one can enforce a phenomenology word-ban on anyone. Eichberg can call a carrot
a parsnip, if he wishes--though that might cause some difficulties at dinner time.
However, we think that it is poor scholarship to play fast and loose with the idea of
phenomenology, especially if calling (for example) on the name of Merleau-Ponty
(although on none of his ideas) to embellish his texts; and this is very likely to cause
confusion. Equally, if Eichberg wishes to base his 'phenomenology' on a misunderstand-
ing of Husserl's (2001, 168) motto 'Back to the things themselves!' that is his
A PHENOMENAL CONFUSION
339

choice--but a fair approach would be to characterise his enterprise differently, to avoid
confusion, and to avoid misleading future generations of scholars.
So, in short, we have argued that Eichberg has presented a selective and unsound
review of the special issue, whilst banging his drum against the whole approach of
philosophical phenomenology. Unfortunately, he shows little understanding of that
approach, and little familiarity with the authors he so readily denigrates as 'dada-ist' or
'homespun'. His main concern seems to be with the promotion of his own approach,
which is, however, not without its own deep inadequacies.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This paper was written with the institutional support of PRVOUK P39 and a Research
Grant from the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports MSM 0021620864, Czech
Republic.
REFERENCES
ALLEN-COLLINSON, JACQUELYN. 2011. Feminist phenomenology and the woman in the running
body. Sport, Ethics and Philosophy 5 (3): 297-313.
CERBONE, D.R. 2006. Understanding phenomenology. Chesham: Acumen.
EICHBERG, HENNING. 2009a. Bodily democracy--Towards a philosophy of sport for all. Sport, Eth-
ics and Philosophy 3 (2): 115-273, and 3 (3): 286-461.
------. 2009b. Wandering, winding, wondering: Moving in the labyrinth. Movement for Culture
9: 210-25.
------. 2011. Private or phenomenological writing? - Body feminism fumbling its surprising
way. Journal of Martial Arts Anthropology 11 (4): 62-4.
------. 2013. Back to the phenomena (of sport)--Or back to the phenomenologists? Towards
a phenomenology of (sports) phenomenology. Sport, Ethics and Philosophy 7 (2):
271-82.
FINLAY, LINDA. 2009. Debating phenomenological research methods. Phenomenology & Practice
3 (1): 6-25.
GALLAGHER, SHAUN. 2008. Direct perception in the intersubjective context. Consciousness and
Cognition 17 (2): 535-43.
GALLAGHER, SHAUN and DANIEL SCHMICKING. 2010. Handbook of phenomenology and cognitive sci-
ence. Dordrecht: Springer.
HAMILTON, S., R. WHITEHOUSE, K. BROWN, P. COMBES, E. HERRING and M.S. THOMAS. 2006. Phenomenology
in practice: Towards a methodology. European Journal of Archaeology 9 (1): 31-71.
HEIDEGGER, MARTIN. 2001. Sein und Zeit. Tu¨bingen: Max Niemeyer Verlag.
HUSSERL, EDMUND. 2001. Logical investigations. London: Routledge.
KOSIEWICZ, JERZY. 2009. Philosophy of sport from the institutional, content related and method-
ological viewpoint. Movement for Culture 9: 60-85.
LAING, RONNIE D. 1960. The divided self: An existential study in sanity and madness. Harmonds-
worth: Penguin.
------. 1967. Sanity, madness and the family. 2nd ed. London: Penguin Books.
MARTI´NKOVA´, IRENA and JIM PARRY. 2011a. An introduction to the phenomenological study of
sport. Sport, Ethics and Philosophy 5 (3): 185-201.
340
IRENA MARTI´NKOVA´ AND JIM PARRY

------. eds. 2011b. Special Issue: An Introduction to the Phenomenological Study of Sport
Sport, Ethics and Philosophy 5 (3).
------. eds. 2012. Phenomenological approaches to sport. London and New York: Routledge.
NESTI, MARK. 2011. Phenomenology and sports psychology: Back to the things themselves!
Sport, Ethics and Philosophy 5 (3): 285-96.
PARRY, JIM. 2005. Must scientists think philosophically about science? In Philosophies of sport,
health and exercise, edited by M. McNamee. London: Routledge: 22-33.
SCHMICKING, DANIEL. 2010. A toolbox of phenomenological methods. In Handbook of phenome-
nology and cognitive science, edited by S. Gallagher and D. Schmicking. Dordrecht:
Springer: 35-55.
SMITH, DAVID WOODRUFF. 2011. Phenomenology. The Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy, edited
by Edward N. Zalta. Available at http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2011/entries/phe-
nomenology/
SOKOLOWSKI, ROBERT. 2000. Introduction to phenomenology. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
ZAHAVI, DAN. 2002. First-person thoughts and embodied self-awareness: Some reflections on
the relation between recent analytical philosophy and phenomenology. Phenomenol-
ogy and the Cognitive Sciences 1: 7-26.
------. 2010. Naturalized phenomenology. In Handbook of phenomenology and cognitive sci-
ence, edited by S. Gallagher and D. Schmicking. Dordrecht: Springer: 3-19.
Irena Martı´nkova´, Charles University in Prague, Faculty of Physical Education
and Sport, Jose Martı´ho 31, Praha 6 - Veleslavı´n, 162 52 Czech Republic. E-mail:
martinkova@ftvs.cuni.cz
Jim Parry, Charles University in Prague, Faculty of Physical Education and Sport, Jose
Martı´ho 31, Praha 6 - Veleslavı´n, 162 52 Czech Republic. E-mail: s.j.parry@leeds.ac.uk
A PHENOMENAL CONFUSION
341

