Philosophical Explorations
ISSN: 1386-9795 (Print) 1741-5918 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rpex20
Inference or interaction: social cognition without
precursors
Shaun Gallagher
To cite this article: Shaun Gallagher (2008) Inference or interaction: social cognition without
precursors, Philosophical Explorations, 11:3, 163-174, DOI: 10.1080/13869790802239227
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13869790802239227
Published online: 02 Dec 2008.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 1040
View related articles 
Citing articles: 9 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rpex20

Inference or interaction: social cognition without
precursors
Shaun Gallagher
Philosophy and Cognitive Sciences, University of Central Florida, Orlando, Florida,
USA; School of Humanities, University of Hertfordshire, Hatﬁeld, UK
In this paper I defend interaction theory (IT) as an alternative to both theory theory (TT) and
simulation theory (ST). IT opposes the basic suppositions that both TT and ST depend upon. I
argue that the various capacities for primary and secondary intersubjectivity found in infancy
and early childhood should not be thought of as precursors to later developing capacities for
using folk psychology or simulation routines. They are not replaced or displaced by such
capacities in adulthood, but rather continue to operate as our ordinary and everyday basis for
social cognition. I also argue that enactive perception rather than implicit simulation is the best
model for explaining these capacities.
Keywords: interaction theory; simulation; folk psychology; primary intersubjectivity; enactive
perception
Is it possible for us, as human beings who are relatively non-pathological, to observe the behavior
of one or more persons and to draw inferences about what they might be thinking? Yes, I think it
is. Here's an example from Pinker (1994). We overhear the following bit of conversation.
Woman: I'm leaving you
Man: Who is he?
Baron-Cohen (1995, 28) suggests that the following account could be drawn up: 'the man must
have thought [formed a belief] that the woman was leaving him for another man'. A certain belief
motivates the man to say what he says, and we can make sense out of the conversation by
making an inference to that belief and acknowledging a possible context reﬂecting the inﬂuence
of a third party (the other man). Let me note, however, that even in doing this we are helped
along by numerous other factors, which might include the intonations of the couple's voices,
their postures with respect to each other, perhaps their gestures, and the setting they are in.
We certainly need these things since if we consider only the two sentences outside of a
context provided by either the current circumstance or some narrative within which these sen-
tences occur, then we could easily go a different way with our interpretation. For example, we
could imagine the couple at the airport. The woman bought her ticket and is saying farewell
to her brother just as a well-known ﬁlm star and his entourage is passing by. Her brother
points and asks for help remembering the star's name. As observers looking at that scene our
inferences, if we needed inferences, would surely be different.
Philosophical Explorations
Vol. 11, No. 3, September 2008, 163-174
Email: gallaghr@mail.ucf.edu
ISSN 1386-9795 print/ISSN 1741-5918 online
# 2008 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/13869790802239227
http://www.informaworld.com

It also seems very possible for us, guided by our observations, to put ourselves into the shoes
of one of these interlocutors and to imagine what he or she must believe. Again we would need
some sense of the circumstances or some narrative framework to guide us - otherwise we would
have to make a guess from several possible meanings. Are these two lovers breaking up? Are they
friends at the airport? Or is the woman taking leave of her father, who is curious about her
chauffeur?
Roughly speaking, these approaches reﬂect the 'theory of mind' (ToM) explanations offered by
the standard and dominant models of social cognition: theory theory (TT) and simulation theory
(ST). In the ﬁrst case we rely on our folk psychological theory to formulate the inference; in the
second, we explicitly simulate what must be going on in the other's mind by imagining ourselves
in his or her shoes. In setting up the solution to social cognition, these two models share the fol-
lowing three suppositions. First, social cognition is a problem (the 'problem of other minds')
because we lack direct access to other minds. Since we cannot directly perceive the other's
thoughts, feelings, or intentions, we need some special cognitive process (theorizing, simulating)
that will allow us to infer (mindread, mentalize) mental states in others. Second, our normal every-
day stance toward the other person is an observational stance. We observe their behaviors with
some degree of detachment, and we use those observations as evidence for our theorizing, or as
starting points for our simulating. Third, these mentalizing processes (theorizing or simulating)
constitute our primary and pervasive way of understanding others (which I've called the supposi-
tion of universality; Gallagher 2004). Whenever we encounter others (or at least in most encoun-
ters) we attempt to explain or predict their behavior by divining their mental states. In regard to
this last claim, consider the following sample statements.
. . . it is hard for us to make sense of behavior in any other way than via the mentalistic (or 'intentional')
framework . . . [A]ttribution of mental states is to humans as echolocation is to the bat. It is our natural
way of understanding the social environment. (Baron-Cohen 1995, 3-4)
. . . mind-reading and the capacity to negotiate the social world are not the same thing, but the former
seems to be necessary for the latter . . . our basic grip on the social world depends on our being able to
see our fellows as motivated by beliefs and desires we sometimes share and sometimes do not. (Currie
and Sterelny 2000, 145)
The strongest form of ST would say that all cases of (third-person) mentalization employ simulation. A
moderate version would say, for example, that simulation is the default method of mentalization . . . I
am attracted to the moderate version . . . Simulation is the primitive, root form of interpersonal men-
talization. (Goldman 2002, 7-8)
The alternative to TT and ST that I, and several others, have proposed (Gallagher 2001; Hobson
1993, 2002; Hutto 2008a,b; Ratcliffe 2007; also see Slors 2007), and that, for convenience, I'll
call interaction theory (IT), challenges the ToMistic models on each of these suppositions.
(1) It (or IT) rejects the mentalizing supposition, that is, the Cartesian idea that other minds
are hidden away and inaccessible, and cites evidence that in many cases knowing the
other person's intentions, emotions, and dispositions is simply a matter of perceiving
their embodied behavior in the situation. In most cases of everyday interaction no infer-
ence is necessary.
(2) IT rejects the spectatorial supposition that we are primarily spectators or observers of
others' behaviors. Our normal everyday stance toward the other person is not third-
person, detached observation; it is second-person interaction. For the most part we are
Shaun Gallagher
164

interacting with them on some project, or in some communicative practice, or in some pre-
deﬁned relation.
(3) IT rejects the supposition of universality in regard to mentalizing, either by theory or by
simulation. Rather, mentalizing or mindreading are, at best, specialized abilities that are
relatively rarely employed, and they depend on more embodied and situated ways of per-
ceiving and understanding others, which are more primary and pervasive.
On this approach, in the case of overhearing the short bit of conversation, and in seeing the
people in their speciﬁc circumstances, there is no puzzle to solve, no inference to make, since
everything is just out there and obvious. Perhaps, if we witnessed the scene but could not
hear the words, or if we heard only the words but could not see the situation, or if the people
were acting in an odd way that did not match their words, or were saying odd things that did
not match their actions, we might have to resort to folk psychology or to simulation in order
to formulate some inferences and to piece it all together. These, however, are relatively rare or
specialized cases where some version of TT or ST or some hybrid theory might have some
relevance.1
IT, then, is posed as a challenge to both TT and ST, not by denying the possibility of folk
psychological theorizing or the running of simulation routines in certain (and relatively rare) cir-
cumstances, but by shifting the very framework, by questioning the very suppositions, that TT
and ST assume to be in place when it comes to understanding others. By questioning these sup-
positions interaction theorists deny that everyday social cognition happens the way that TT and
ST suggest.
To provide a complete account of social cognition and interaction, IT focuses on three sets of
capacities, evidence for which can be found in both science and phenomenology. The ﬁrst set of
capacities is anchored in an embodied intersubjective perception that is manifest from early
infancy. The second starts to develop around the age of one year and is signaled by the phenom-
enon of joint attention, which brings with it the importance of context. A third set of capacities is
based on the acquisition of narrative competency that has its developmental start as the child
gains language and comprehends stories. In this paper I plan to focus on the ﬁrst two. These
capacities are often regarded as precursors to ToM. If we understand a precursor to be something
that disappears as the 'real' phenomenon or possibility of social cognition appears, then I want to
show that these capacities are not precursors, but are basic and continuing parts of the phenom-
enon of social interaction and understanding.
Evidence for interaction theory
We do not arrive in the world as a tabula rasa. Developmental studies consistently tell us that
neonate perception is already relatively smart. The newborn infant can pick out a human face
from the crowd of objects in its environment, with sufﬁcient detail that will enable it to
imitate the gesture it sees on that face (Meltzoff and Moore 1977, 1994). We know this is not
reﬂex, but whether this is true imitation, perceptual priming, contagion or something else (an
issue of ongoing debate), it seems clear that at minimum newborn infants are in some sense
tuned to others and are building on an implicit orientation to other persons (Gallagher and
Meltzoff 1996). In addition, there is evidence to suggest that neonate imitation is interactive; new-
borns not only imitate, but also use facial gesture to provoke response from others (Nagy and
Molnarb 2004). Young infants are visually attracted to faces, to movement (biological movement).
Auditorily, they are attracted to certain kinds of sounds (mother's voice). Infants are able to detect
Inference or Interaction
165

correspondences between visual and auditory information that specify the expression of
emotions as early as ﬁve to seven months (Walker 1982; also Hobson 1993, 2002). At nine
months infants follow the other person's eyes (Senju, Johnson, and Csibra 2006) and start to per-
ceive various movements of the head, the mouth, the hands, and more general body movements
as meaningful, goal-directed movements. Infants as young as six months perceive grasping as
goal directed; infants at 10-11 months are able to parse some kinds of continuous action accord-
ing to intentional boundaries (Baldwin and Baird 2001; Baldwin et al. 2001; Baird and Baldwin
2001; Woodward and Sommerville 2000).
This is a quick summary of the hard-won evidence provided by developmental psychology for
what Trevarthen (1979) calls 'primary intersubjectivity'. By the end of the ﬁrst year of life, infants
are capable of a non-mentalistic, perceptually-based embodied understanding of the intentions
and dispositions of other persons (Allison, Puce, and McCarthy 2000; Baldwin 1993; Johnson 2000;
Johnson, Slaughter, and Carey 1998). In this regard an appeal to unperceived hidden beliefs or
mental states is not required (Kira´ly et al. 2003; Biro, Csibra, and Gergely 2007).
Secondary intersubjectivity builds on these primary perceptual and interactive capabilities,
starting at around 12 months (Trevarthan and Hubley 1978; Hobson 2002). This is when
infants start to recognize context as signiﬁcant. To understand a certain gesture or action, they
use both the other actions performed by the agent and the causal constraints of the situation.
Shared or joint attention emerges as an important element in the child's understanding of the
environment. Joint attention is itself an intersubjective accomplishment, but it also allows the
infant to comprehend how surrounding context helps to deﬁne the actions of others. Infants
start to see intentions as relations between agents and objects, or agents and other agents.
Notably without the intervention of theory or simulation, and in a non-mentalizing way,
infants are able to see bodily movement as expressive of emotion, and as goal-directed inten-
tional action. At 18 months infants can re-enact to completion the goal-directed behavior that
an observed subject fails to complete, showing that they recognize the unfulﬁlled intentions
of others (Herrmann et al. 2007; Meltzoff 1995). Given the context and the person's actions,
they can see what the person wants to do. This is a perceptual capacity that is 'fast, automatic,
irresistible and highly stimulus-driven' (Scholl and Tremoulet 2000, 299).
Baron-Cohen (1995), Currie (2008), and many others, regard the capabilities of primary and
secondary intersubjectivity to be precursors to full-blown ToM. This would mean that either
these perceptual and contextual practices are simply displaced by the higher cognitive functions
of theorizing or simulating, or that these higher functions are built upon the more primary ones
so that they come to serve in some way a more consistent and ubiquitous set of cognitive
capacities. Even in the latter case, however, the idea that these capacities are precursors
means that eventually and developmentally, they are not the capacities that we employ in our
more sophisticated adult comprehension of others. In contrast to the proposal that these
capacities are precursors, however, adult phenomenology attests to the continued role of
primary and secondary intersubjectivity in our everyday understanding of and interaction with
others. Thus, for example, Max Scheler claims that we have a direct perception of the other
person's feeling.
For we certainly believe ourselves to be directly acquainted with another person's joy in his laughter,
with his sorrow and pain in his tears, with his shame in his blushing, with his entreaty in his out-
stretched hands . . . And with the tenor of this thoughts in the sound of his words. If anyone tells
me that this is not 'perception' . . . I would beg him to turn aside from such questionable theories
and address himself to the phenomenological facts. (1954, 260-1)
Shaun Gallagher
166

One ﬁnds an implicit (and somewhat pre-emptive) critique of the idea that we need inference or
simulation in Wittgenstein as well.
Look into someone else's face, and see the consciousness in it, and a particular shade of conscious-
ness. You see on it, in it, joy, indifference, interest, excitement, torpor, and so on . . . Do you look
into yourself in order to recognize the fury in his face? (Wittgenstein 1967, §229)
'We see emotion.' - As opposed to what? - We do not see facial contortions and make the inference
that he is feeling joy, grief, boredom. We describe a face immediately as sad, radiant, bored, even
when we are unable to give any other description of the features. - Grief, one would like to say, is
personiﬁed in the face . . . In general I do not surmise fear in him - I see it. I do not feel that I am dedu-
cing the probable existence of something inside from something outside; rather it is as if the human
face were in a way translucent and that I were seeing it not in reﬂected light but rather in its own.
(Wittgenstein 1980, §§570, 170)
Philosophers and phenomenologists are not alone in making such claims. Psychologists provide
important empirical evidence that our everyday adult interaction is primarily perceptual and con-
textual. When we see a smiling face (and other facial gestures) we automatically, involuntarily,
and non-consciously attune to it with an enactive, mimetic, response (Schilbach et al. 2008).
This kind of motor resonance is not restricted to mirror neuron activation - it involves a more
wide-ranging activation in various brain areas.
The neural network active during this period . . . i.e., during the occurrence of facial mimicry, is formed
by signiﬁcant activations in the precentral motor area, as well as in several other, non-motor regions of
the brain. More precisely, our analysis demonstrated activations pertaining to the window of interest
within the posterior portions of cingulate gyrus on both hemispheres. Furthermore, differential neural
activity is seen in the right hippocampus. Differential neural activity was also observed in the dorsal
midbrain, . . . interpreted as activity in the midbrain tectum. Additionally, our results demonstrate acti-
vation of the inferior aspects of the left precentral gyrus, i.e., the face motor area. Lastly, differential
brain activity is found in the left precuneus. . . (Schilbach et al. 2008, 42)
Schilbach et al. suggest that 'the process of perceiving faces always includes an "enactive"
element through which we engage with and respond to stimuli instead of a mere "passive" per-
ception of face-based cues' (2008, 45). Far from disappearing or being displaced, primary and sec-
ondary intersubjective capabilities mature and become more sophisticated in adulthood. Dittrich
et al. (1996), for example, showed that adult subjects are able to perceive emotion in patterns of
human movement. Subjects were presented with brief videos of dancers in two conditions: (1) in
fully lit scenes; and (2) in the dark while wearing 13 point-lights at their joints. They portrayed fear,
anger, grief, joy, surprise, or disgust through their movements. Subjects correctly identiﬁed the
fully-lit presented emotion 88% of the time, and the emotion presented by point-light display
63% of the time. Clarke et al. (2005) extended this paradigm to show that subjects are able to
identify emotions in dyadic interaction, but that emotion perception is affected by veridical
versus non-veridical context (also see Atkinson et al. 2004). Similar conclusions have been estab-
lished in relation to the perception of pain and emotion in dynamic facial expressions (Simon
et al. 2008). Other experiments show speciﬁc brain areas involved in the perception of intentions
and the effect of context (e.g., Pelphrey, Morris, and McCarthy 2004), and the perception of eye
gaze and context (Mosconi et al. 2005; Pelphrey et al. 2003).
In ordinary instances of interaction with others, and in contrast to some of these experimental
situations, I do not occupy an observer position; I am not off to the side simply perceiving, or
thinking or trying to ﬁgure out what they are doing. Rather, I'm responding to them in an
Inference or Interaction
167

embodied way, and my perception is for interaction. My understanding of the other person is
constituted within the perception-action loops that deﬁne the various things that I am doing
with or in response to others. This can be clearly shown in a micro-analysis of the postures, move-
ments, gestures, gazes and facial expressions of people as they engage in a novel task and where
communication among them comes in the very actions that they take (see Lindblom 2007;
Niedenthal et al. 2005).
All of this evidence challenges the ToMistic claim that in the course of our normal everyday
interactions we are engaged in mind reading, in the sense of composing something like an infer-
ence from observed behavior to a set of inaccessible mental states. Some ToM accounts do refer
to interaction, but they stay with the idea that what is at stake is the interaction of two minds that
have to communicate across an unbridgeable gap ﬁlled with nothing more than thin air. Thus, '. . .
the study of social interaction . . . is concerned with the question of how two minds shape each
other mutually through reciprocal interactions. To understand interactive minds we have to
understand how thoughts, feelings, intentions, and beliefs can be transmitted from one mind
to the other' (Singer, Wolpert, and Frith 2004, xvii). In contrast, on the IT view, the intentionality
found in our interactions is not the isolated characteristic of any individual mind; it rather
emerges as a product of embodied social interaction (Gallagher 2001; Gibbs 2001; Ratcliffe
2007). On this view we do not ordinarily need to go further than what is already the rich and
complex comprehension that we gain through the perception of a situated agent - that is, of
an agent who is situated in an environment which also tells us something about what that
person is doing and thinking. If I see the situation and what the agent is doing in it; if I see
how the agent is doing it, and what the agent is expressing (e.g., through her gestures and
style of movement); and if my perception is already informed by my own interactions with her
and others, as well as by my previous situated experiences, by my habitual ways of understand-
ing, by socially established practices and by narratives that carry with them cultural norms, then
in our normal ordinary engagements the work of understanding is already sufﬁciently accom-
plished and I do not have to go any further. That is, I do not take everything that I perceive as
evidence to be used in forming an inference about hidden mental states which, once discovered,
would then bestow meaning upon the other person's behavior. The other person's actions and
expressions are already meaningful and are perceived as such.
Of course behavior is often ambiguous. Ambiguity is reduced, however, and our sense of
the other person's behavior is helped along through our continued interactions, and by
context - which are physical, social, and cultural, at the same time. This does not rule out
the possibility of unresolved ambiguity, and in some circumstances the other person may
be a real puzzle. Other persons do not always reveal their thoughts or emotions via their
expressions, actions, behaviors, etc. The claim here is not that perception and the reliance
on context (as well as narrative and the recognition of social roles, etc.) can penetrate to
the soul of the other person and discover her innermost emotional states. Nor is the claim
that we can never be misled by what we perceive. Rather, the claim is that for the most
part, in most of our encounters in everyday life, perception and context deliver sufﬁcient
(or close to sufﬁcient) information for understanding others. Moreover, it would be something
that I discover only via these means that would lead me to the idea that perhaps something
more is going on with the other person. At that point I would not hesitate to say that we might
then turn to other means (narrative practices ﬁrst of all; see Gallagher and Hutto 2008; Hutto
2008a, 2008b; or even folk theoretical practices or simulation) to more deeply interpret the
person. Yet, even to enter into such processes we ﬁrst have to recognize via perception
and context that the person's behaviors or expressions are perplexing or incoherent, and it
Shaun Gallagher
168

would be this that would motivate further interpretation. And once again, I claim that this is
relatively rare. In our everyday engagements we do not constantly go around trying to solve
such puzzles.2 Practically speaking, and given long-term frameworks that are established in
narrative practices, my intersubjective perceptual abilities deliver what I need in order to
understand and interact with others most of the time.
Implicit simulation and motor resonance
One response to IT from those who would defend ST is that many of the capabilities that are
described under the heading of primary intersubjectivity depend on implicit processes that are
best described as simulation processes. This idea appeals to recently developed neuroscientiﬁc
evidence involving sub-personal activation of mirror neurons, shared representations, or more
generally, resonance systems. My motor system, and speciﬁcally, mirror neurons in the pre-
motor cortex, Broca's area, and the parietal cortex, are activated when I perceive another
person performing an intentional action (Rizzolatti et al. 1996; Rizzolatti, Fogassi, and Gallese
2000). Speciﬁc overlapping neural areas (shared representations), in parts of the frontal and par-
ietal cortexes, are activated when I engage in intentional actions and when I observe some other
person engage in that action (e.g., Gre`zes and Decety 2001). According to some simulation the-
orists these processes are the neural correlates of explicit acts of simulation (see e.g., Jeannerod
and Pacherie 2004). Others, however, maintain that these subpersonal processes themselves just
are simulation processes. Activation of mirror neurons involves 'automatic, implicit, and nonre-
ﬂexive simulation mechanisms. . .' (Gallese 2005, 117). Such activations constitute 'simulation rou-
tines, as if processes enabling models of others to be created' at the functional level (Gallese 2001,
45; also see Gallese 2007).
A growing number of researchers have taken up the simulation terminology as a generally
accepted way to describe mirror system processes. That mirror neuron activation is a simulation
not only of the goal of the observed action but of the intention of the acting individual, and
therefore a form of mind-reading, is suggested by research that shows mirror neurons discrimi-
nate identical movements according to the intentional action and contexts in which these move-
ments are embedded (Fogassi et al. 2005; Iacoboni et al. 2005; Kaplan and Iacoboni 2006). Neural
simulation has also been used as an explanation of how we grasp emotions and pain in others
(Avenanti and Aglioti 2006; Minio-Paluello, Avenanti, and Aglioti 2006; Gallese, Eagle, and
Migone 2007).
There are, however, several problems involved in calling mirror neuron activity simulation
(Gallagher 2007a, 2007b, in press). According to standard ST, simulation involves instrumental
control of a model to understand something that we cannot understand directly. Simulation
also involves pretense - the idea that we use our own mental states 'as if' they were the
mental states of others. Subpersonal mirroring processes, however, do not have an instrumental
character of being under our control; rather they are automatic and elicited by the actions of
others. Also, because mirror neurons are activated both when I act and when I see someone
else act, they are said to be neutral with respect to who the agent is (see Gallese 2005; Hurley
2005; Jeannerod and Pacherie 2004). If that is so, then they do not and can not involve pretense,
which requires distinguishing one agent (me) from another (you).
Goldman, acknowledging these issues, jettisons the instrumental and pretense aspects and
suggests a weakened or minimal deﬁnition of simulation as a form of matching (2006;
Goldman and Sripada 2005). This proposal, however, fails to explain how we understand
others who are engaged in very different activities from us, or who are experiencing very
Inference or Interaction
169

different emotions. Supposedly, if our motor systems matched theirs, it would be difﬁcult to
react to their actions in any but a mimetic fashion. In addition, neuroscientiﬁc evidence shows
that mirror neuron activation does not necessarily involve a precise match between motor
system execution and observed action, but may be involved in 'logically related' actions or in
anticipating future action (Csibra 2005; Iacoboni et al. 2005; also see Jacob 2008).
The fact that we often experience an emotion or feeling that is different from the emotion that
is clearly being experienced by the other person raises a question about interpreting social under-
standing as 'simulative in the broad sense' (Currie 2008). As I witness Tom, an entomologist who, I
can see, is obviously overjoyed as he reaches to grab an ugly arthopod, I may, at the very same
time, be experiencing disgust and be moving away. On neither personal nor subpersonal levels
am I simulating Tom, if simulation involves a matching process, since both my emotional experi-
ence and my motor system are in very different states from Tom's. I nonetheless, and without
simulation of either an explicit or implicit kind, have an immediate understanding of Tom's
action and his enthusiasm.
To deny that mirror resonance processes constitute simulations is not to deny that mirror
neurons may be involved in our interactions with others, possibly contributing to our ability to
understand others or to keep track of ongoing intersubjective relations. An alternative and
more parsimonious interpretation of mirror neuron activation is to view them as part of the neur-
onal processes that underlie social perception. The articulated neuronal processes that include
activation of mirror neurons or shared representations constitute the neural correlates of a
non-articulated immediate perception of the other person's intentional actions, rather than a dis-
tinct process of simulating their intentions (Gallagher 2007a, in press).
If perception is an enactive process (Hurley 1998; Noe¨ 2004; Varela, Thompson, and Rosch
1991), involving sensory-motor skills rather than just sensory input/processing, then it is certainly
more appropriate to think of mirror resonance processes as part of the structure of the perceptual
process when it is an intersubjective perception of what the other is doing.
This interpretation of mirror neuron activation offers a tight ﬁt with IT. Mirroring processes
may underpin a capacity for human interaction and intersubjective understanding already oper-
ative in infancy in certain embodied practices. On this view the mind of the other person is not
something hidden away and inaccessible. In seeing the actions and expressive movements of the
other person in the context of the surrounding world, one already experiences their meaning,
with no need of inference to a hidden set of mental states (beliefs, desires, etc.). This alternative,
non-simulationist interpretation suggests that before we are in a position to theorize, simulate,
explain or predict mental states in others, we are already in a position to interact with and to
understand others in terms of their expressions, gestures, and purposive movements, reﬂecting
their intentions and emotions.
Notes
1.
Even in such cases we do not have to revert to the idea that there are hidden mental states that need to
be mentalized. Rather, it is enough to say that things don't add up - the words, the emotional
expressions, the bodily stances, the situation, etc., lack a certain coherency, and this may motivate us
to engage in folk psychological practices or simulations.
2.
Indeed, in contrast to the claim by ToM approaches that subjects with Aspergers or Autism Spectrum
Disorder lack a theory of mind, in fact high-functioning austistics and Asperger's subjects have only the-
orizing to resort to; they have problems at the level of primary and secondary intersubjectivity (see Gal-
lagher 2004).
Shaun Gallagher
170

Notes on contributor
Shaun Gallagher is Professor of Philosophy and Cognitive Sciences at the University of Central
Florida and Research Professor of Philosophy and Cognitive Science at the University of Hertford-
shire. He has held visiting positions at the Ecole Normale Supe´riure, Lyon, the University of
Copenhagen, and the Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge. His recent books include
How the Body Shapes the Mind (Oxford University Press, 2005); and with Dan Zahavi, The Phenom-
enological Mind (Routledge, 2007). He is co-editor of the journal Phenomenology and the Cognitive
Sciences, and recently co-edited Does Consciousness Cause Behavior? An Investigation of the Nature
of Volition (MIT, 2006).
References
Allison, T., Q. Puce, and G. McCarthy. 2000. Social perception from visual cues: Role of the STS region. Trends in
Cognitive Science 4, no. 7: 267-78.
Atkinson, A.P., W.H. Dittrich, A.J. Gemmell, and A.W. Young. 2004. Emotion perception from dynamic and
static body expressions in point-light and full-light displays. Perception 33: 717-46.
Avenanti, A., and S.M. Aglioti. 2006. The sensorimotor side of empathy for pain. In Psychoanalysis and neuro-
science. ed. M. Mancia, 235-56. Milan: Springer.,
Baird, J.A., and D.A. Baldwin. 2001. Making sense of human behavior: Action parsing and intentional infer-
ence. In Intentions and intentionality: Foundations of social cognition, ed. B.F. Malle, L.J. Moses and
D.A. Baldwin, 193-206. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Baldwin, D.A. 1993. Infants' ability to consult the speaker for clues to word reference. Journal of Child
Language 20: 395-418.
Baldwin, D.A., and J.A. Baird. 2001. Discerning intentions in dynamic human action. Trends in Cognitive Science
5, no. 4: 171-8.
Baldwin, D.A., J.A. Baird, M.M. Saylor, and M.A. Clark. 2001. Infants parse dynamic action. Child Development
72: 708-17.
Baron-Cohen, S. 1995. Mindblindness: An essay on autism and theory of mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Biro, S., G. Csibra, and G. Gergely. 2007. The role of behavioral cues in understanding goal-directed actions in
infancy. Progress in Brain Research 164: 303-22.
Clarke, T.J., M.F. Bradshaw, D.T. Field, S.E. Hampson, and D. Rose. 2005. The perception of emotion from body
movement in point-light displays of interpersonal dialogue. Perception 34: 1171-80.
Csibra, G. 2005. Mirror neurons and action observation. Is simulation involved?. ESF Interdisciplines, http://
www.interdisciplines.org/mirror/papers/.
Currie, G. 2008. Some ways to understand people. Philosophical Explorations 11, no. 3: 211-18.
Currie, G., and K. Sterelny. 2000. How to think about the modularity of mind-reading. Philosophical Quarterly
50: 145-60.
Dittrich, W.H., T. Troscianko, S.E.G. Lea, and D. Morgan. 1996. Perception of emotion from dynamic point-light
displays represented in dance. Perception 25: 727-38.
Fogassi, L., P.F. Ferrari, B. Gesierich, S. Rozzi, F. Chersi, and G. Rizzolatti. 2005. Parietal lobe: From action organ-
ization to intention understanding. Science 308: 662-7.
Gallagher, S. 2001. The practice of mind: Theory, simulation, or interaction?. Journal of Consciousness Studies 8,
nos. 5-7: 83-107.
———. 2004. Understanding interpersonal problems in autism: Interaction theory as an alternative to theory
of mind. Philosophy, Psychiatry, and Psychology 11, no. 3: 199-217.
———. 2007a. Logical and phenomenological arguments against simulation theory. In Folk psychology re-
assessed, ed. D. Hutto and M. Ratcliffe, 63-78. Dordrecht: Springer.
Inference or Interaction
171

———. 2007b. Simulation trouble. Social Neuroscience 2: 353-65.
———. In press. Neural simulation and social cognition. In Mirror neuron systems: The role of mirroring pro-
cesses in social cognition. ed. J.A. Pineda. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press.
Gallagher, S., and D. Hutto. 2008. Understanding others through primary interaction and narrative practice. In
The shared mind: Perspectives on intersubjectivity, ed. J. Zlatev, T.P. Racine, C. Sinha and E. Itkonen,
17-38. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Gallagher, S. and A.N. Meltzoff. 1996. The earliest sense of self and others. Philosophical Psychology 9: 213-36.
Gallese, V. 2001. The 'shared manifold' hypothesis: From mirror neurons to empathy. Journal of Consciousness
Studies 8: 33-50.
———. 2005. 'Being like me': Self-other identity, mirror neurons and empathy. In Perspectives on imitation, ed.
S. Hurley and N. Chater, vol. 1. 101-18. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
———. 2007. Before and below 'theory of mind': Embodied simulation and the neural correlates of social
cognition. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B Biological Sciences 362: 659-69.
Gallese, V., M.N. Eagle, and P. Migone. 2007. Intentional attunement: Mirror neurons and the neural under-
pinnings of interpersonal relations. Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association 55, no. 1:
131-76.
Gibbs, R.W. 2001. Intentions as emergent products of social interactions. In Intentions and intentionality:
Foundations of social cognition, ed. B.F. Malle, L.J. Moses and D.A. Baldwin, 105-22. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
———. 2006. Simulating minds: The philosophy, psychology and neuroscience of mindreading. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Goldman, A.I. 2002. Simulation theory and mental concepts. In Simulation and knowledge of action, ed.
J. Dokic and J. Proust, 1-19. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Goldman, A.I., and C.S. Sripada. 2005. Simulationist models of face-based emotion recognition. Cognition 94:
193-213.
Gre`zes, J., and J. Decety. 2001. Functional anatomy of execution, mental simulation, and verb generation of
actions: A meta-analysis. Human Brain Mapping 12: 1-19.
Herrmann, E., J. Call, B. Hare, and M. Tomasello. 2007. Humans evolved specialized skills of social cognition:
The cultural intelligence hypothesis. Science 317: 1360-6.
Hobson, P. 1993. The emotional origins of social understanding. Philosophical Psychology 6: 227-49.
———. 2002. The cradle of thought. London: Macmillan.
Hurley, S.L. 1998. Consciousness in action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
———. 2005. Active perception and perceiving action: The shared circuits model. In Perceptual experience, ed.
T. Gendler and J. Hawthorne, 205-59. New York: Oxford University Press.
Hutto, D.D. 2008a. Folk psychological narratives: The sociocultural basis of understanding reasons. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
———. 2008b. The Narrative Practice Hypothesis: Clariﬁcations and implications. Philosophical Explorations
11, no. 3: 175-92.
Iacoboni, M., I. Molnar-Szakacs, V. Gallese, G. Buccino, J.C. Mazziotta, and G. Rizzolatti. 2005. Grasping the
intentions of others with one's own mirror neuron system. PLoS Biology 3: 529-35.
Jacob, P. 2008. What do mirror neurons contribute to human social cognition? Mind and Language 23:
190-223.
Jeannerod, M., and E. Pacherie. 2004. Agency, simulation, and self-identiﬁcation. Mind and Language 19: 113-46.
Johnson, S.C. 2000. The recognition of mentalistic agents in infancy. Trends in Cognitive Science 4: 22-8.
Johnson, S.C., V. Slaughter, and S. Carey. 1998. Whose gaze will infants follow? The elicitation of gaze-follow-
ing in 12-month-old infants. Developmental Science 1: 233-8.
Kaplan, J.T., and M. Iacoboni. 2006. Getting a grip on other minds: Mirror neurons, intention understanding,
and cognitive empathy. Social Neuroscience 1, nos. 3-4: 175-83.
Shaun Gallagher
172

Kira´ly, I., B. Jovanovic, W. Prinz, G. Aschersleben, and G. Gergely. 2003. The early origins of goal attribution in
infancy. Consciousness and Cognition 12: 752-69.
Lindblom, J. 2007. Minding the body: Interacting socially through embodied action. Linko¨ping Studies in
Science and Technology, dissertation no. 1112. Linko¨ping: Linko¨ping University Publication.
Meltzoff, A.N. 1995. Understanding the intentions of others: Re-enactment of intended acts by 18-month-old
children. Developmental Psychology 31: 838-50.
Meltzoff, A.N., and M.K. Moore. 1977. Imitation of facial and manual gestures by human neonates. Science 198:
75-8.
———. 1994. Imitation, memory, and the representation of persons. Infant Behavior and Development 17:
83-99.
Minio-Paluello, I., A. Avenanti, and S.M. Aglioti. 2006. Social Neuroscience 1, nos. 3-4: 320-33.
Mosconi, M.W., P.B. Mack, G. McCarthy, and K.A. Pelphrey. 2005. Taking an 'intentional stance' on eye-gaze
shifts: A functional neuroimaging study of social perception in children. Neuroimage 27, no. 1: 247-52.
Nagy, E., and P. Molnarb. 2004. Homo imitans or homo provocans? Human imprinting model of neonatal imi-
tation. Infant Behavior and Development 27: 54-63.
Niedenthal, P.M., L.M. Barsalou, P. Winkielman, S. Krauth-Gruber, and F. Ric. 2005. Embodiment in attitudes,
social perception, and emotion. Personality and Social Psychology Review 9, no. 3: 184-211.
Noe¨, A. 2004. Action in perception. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pelphrey, K.A., J.P. Morris, and G. McCarthy. 2004. Grasping the intentions of others: The perceived intention-
ality of an action inﬂuences activity in the superior temporal sulcus during social perception. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience 16: 1706-16.
Pelphrey, K.A., J.D. Singerman, T. Allison, and G. McCarthy. 2003. Brain activation evoked by perception of
gaze shifts: The inﬂuence of context. Neuropsychologia 41, no. 2: 156-70.
Pinker, S. 1994. The language instinct. Baltimore, MD: Penguin.
Ratcliffe, M.J. 2007. Rethinking commonsense psychology: A critique of folk psychology, theory of mind and simu-
lation. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
Rizzolatti, G., L. Fadiga, V. Gallese, and L. Fogassi. 1996. Premotor cortex and the recognition of motor actions.
Cognitive Brain Research 3: 131-41.
Rizzolatti, G., L. Fogassi, and V. Gallese. 2000. Cortical mechanisms subserving object grasping and action
recognition: A new view on the cortical motor functions. In The new cognitive neurosciences. ed.
M.S. Gazzaniga, 539-52. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Scheler, M. 1954. The nature of sympathy. Trans. P. Heath. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. (Orig. pub. 1923.)
Schilbach, L., S.B. Eickhoff, A. Mojzisch, and K. Vogeley. 2008. What's in a smile? Neural correlates of facial
embodiment during social interaction. Social Neuroscience 3, no. 1: 37-50.
Scholl, B.J., and P.D. Tremoulet. 2000. Perceptual causality and animacy. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 4, no. 8:
299-309.
Senju, A., M.H. Johnson, and G. Csibra. 2006. The development and neural basis of referential gaze percep-
tion. Social Neuroscience 1, nos. 3-4: 220-34.
Simon, D., K.D. Craig, F. Gosselin, P. Belin, and P. Rainville. 2008. Recognition and discrimination of prototy-
pical dynamic expressions of pain and emotions. Pain 135, nos. 1-2: 55-64.
Singer, W., D. Wolpert, and C. Frith. 2004. Introduction: The study of social interactions. In The neuroscience of
social interaction, ed. C. Frith and D. Wolpert, xii-xxvii. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Slors, M. 2007. Intentional systems theory, mental causation and empathic resonance. Erkenntnis 67: 321-36.
Trevarthen, C.B. 1979. Communication and cooperation in early infancy: A description of primary intersubjec-
tivity. In Before speech. ed. M. Bullowa, 321-47. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Trevarthen, C., and P. Hubley. 1978. Secondary intersubjectivity: Conﬁdence, conﬁding and acts of meaning in
the ﬁrst year. In Action, gesture and symbol: The emergence of language, ed. A. Lock, 183-229. London:
Academic Press.
Inference or Interaction
173

Varela, F.J., E. Thompson, and E. Rosch. 1991. The embodied mind: Cognitive science and human experience.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Walker, A.S. 1982. Intermodal perception of expressive behaviors by human infants. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology 33: 514-35.
Wittgenstein L. 1967. Zettel. Ed. G.E.M. Anscombe and G.H. von Wright. Trans. G.E.M. Anscombe. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
———. 1980. Remarks on the philosophy of psychology. Ed. G.H. von Wright and H. Nyman. Vol. II. Trans.
C.G. Luckhardt and M.A.E. Aue. Oxford: Blackwell.
Woodward, A.L., and J.A. Sommerville. 2000. Twelve-month-old infants interpret action in context.
Psychological Science 11: 73-7.
Shaun Gallagher
174

