Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology
ISSN: 0007-1773 (Print) 2332-0486 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rbsp20
On the Full Concretion of Subjectivity in
Husserl's Phenomenology: Contingency and the
Transcendental Person
Mérédith Laferté-Coutu
To cite this article: Mérédith Laferté-Coutu (2023) On the Full Concretion of Subjectivity in
Husserl's Phenomenology: Contingency and the Transcendental Person, Journal of the British
Society for Phenomenology, 54:2, 113-131, DOI: 10.1080/00071773.2022.2164736
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00071773.2022.2164736
Published online: 06 Jan 2023.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 345
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rbsp20

On the Full Concretion of Subjectivity in Husserl's
Phenomenology: Contingency and the Transcendental
Person
Mérédith Laferté-Coutu
Department of Philosophy, Concordia University, Montreal, Canada
ABSTRACT
This paper argues that Husserl's personalist ethics provides a new
way to understand the meaning of the full concretion of the
transcendental ego in his mature phenomenology. Husserl's late
ethics introduces, at the core of his thinking, a notion of
contingency that he associates with irrationality and facticity. This
central aspect of human life, namely that contingency traverses it
through and through and which ethics makes painfully visible, is
usually obscured by the phenomenological attitude, insofar as
the phenomenological reduction brackets all matters of fact. Yet
the concrete is not the same as the factual, for Husserl. This
paper
shows
that,
when
fully
concretely
understood,
the
transcendental ego is a person who is correlated to a practical
world, whose life as a whole has a personal style, and who
struggles against what Husserl calls the contingency of destiny.
ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 18 October 2021
Accepted 29 December 2022
KEYWORDS
Husserl; ethics;
transcendental person;
contingency; concretion
One of the surprising things about Husserl's ethics is that it introduces, at the core of his
thinking, a notion of contingency that he associates with irrationality and facticity.1 This
paper argues that Husserl's grappling with the problem of contingency and the response
he develops to this problem speak to a core ethical issue, namely, how to understand the
endurance of rational commitments over time, even if life is shot through with
© 2023 The British Society for Phenomenology
CONTACT Mérédith Laferté-Coutu
m_lafert@live.concordia.ca
Concordia University, Montreal, Canada
1 Husserl's texts discussing ethics are multiple, span over his entire life, and take diﬀerent forms. Most of them are lec-
tures, none of them are oﬃcially published works, and some are only manuscripts. This fact alone already reveals that
ethical questions continually inhabited Husserl's thinking, though, at the same time, were never suﬃciently developed
to warrant a publication. Those texts are today collected in four Husserliana volumes: Hua 28 Vorlesungen über Ethik
und Wertlehre (1908-1914), Hua 37 Einleitung in die Ethik (1920), Hua 42 Grenzprobleme der Phänomenologie - Analysen
des Unbewusstseins und der Instinkte. Metaphysik. Späte Ethik, and HuaMat 9 Einleitung in die Philosophie. Only part of
this last volume, of the Materialien series, published in 2012, discusses a priori axiology and social ethics. This paper
focuses on the Grenzprobleme, published in 2014, gathering varied kinds of texts, in terms of dates and topics, span-
ning from 1908 to 1937. For Husserl's discussions of irrationality and facticity, see various moments of volume: "The
dark horizon of senselessness" [Der dunkle Horizont der Sinnlosigkeit], 304; "Possibilities of value in the face of the
ﬁnitude of humans' and of irrational accidents" [Wertmöglichkeiten angesichts der Endlichkeit des Menschen und des
irrationalen Zufalls], 314; "the battle against destiny" [der Kampf gegen das Schicksal], 321; "The problem of the
meaning of ethical striving in the face of the irrationality of facticity" [Das Problem des Sinnes ethischen Strebens ange-
sichts der Irrationalitäten der Faktizität], 378; "Genuine life in the face of destiny, illness, and death" [Echtes Leben im
Angesicht von Schicksal, Krankheit und Tod], 393; "Death, destiny, and senseless accidents" [Der Tod, das Schicksal, der
sinnlose Zufall], 408; "Universal consciousness of the encompassing value of human existence in the face of irrational
destiny and complete practical doubt" [Universale Besinnungen über den Gesamtwert menschlichen Daseins angesichts
des irrationalen Schicksals und des totalen praktischen Zweifels], 526.
THE JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
2023, VOL. 54, NO. 2, 113-131
https://doi.org/10.1080/00071773.2022.2164736

unpredictability. Contingency can take many forms, for Husserl, from accidental death to
unexpected illness, but most generally, it refers to the immersion of intentional life in a
destiny (Schicksal) that one has no control over. He writes:
Pure universal science stands in contrast with the universality of destiny (Schicksal), of the
inﬁnite and unpredictable happenings (Faktums) which, as destiny, destroy (zerstört) the
rationality of all human practice. The world must have "sense" (Sinn). (...) philosophy
must construct sense in relation to the irrationality of what happens (Irrationalität des
Faktums).2
This passage is striking for any reader of Husserl familiar with the method of phenom-
enology as bracketing all matters of fact for the purposes of pure universal science.
Destiny seems to be posing a threat to the entire enterprise. Husserl confronts the fact
that the rationality of human practice, including any science, is threatened by destiny,
against which reason is powerless. Yet humans continue to engage in their rational activi-
ties and pursue their strivings, theoretical, scientiﬁc, or otherwise. The world cannot not
have sense. But what can striving to be true to myself and to be an ethical person accom-
plish in the face of arbitrariness and chance (Zufall)?3 Instead of bracketing this consider-
ation for the purposes of theoretical inquiry, as phenomenology usually does, Husserl
now sees that the reckoning of reason with its other, the sheer unpredictability of
what happens, can take deeply dark turns, from hopelessness to paralyzing despair,
and that this has ethical signiﬁcance.4 One of the most remarkable aspects of Husserl's
interest in destiny is indeed the suggestion that, sometimes, the answer to the Kantian
question "What can I hope for?" seems to be: nothing at all. When discussing the
eﬀects of war, for example, on the possibility for hope in the world to change, Husserl
writes:
And what if I can have no hope that it will ever be diﬀerent? What if I must judge the world to
be unreasonable (vernunftlose), what if the beauty of nature collapses (...) and I lose my
appreciation for humanity, perhaps because of such a war? Can I live in a "senseless" (sinnlo-
sen) world?5
The deepest challenge that contingency poses to rational practice is how to maintain
commitments to values and ends in a world that seems "senseless." What if I can have
no hope that the world could be diﬀerent? What if, correlatively, I can have no hope
2 Husserl, Grenzprobleme, 238, my translation: "Die universal reine Wissenschaft tritt in Gegensatz zu der Universalität
des Schicksals, des unendlichen und unberechenbaren Faktums, das als Schicksal die Rationalität aller menschlichen
Praxis zerstört. Die Welt muss einen „Sinn" haben. (...) die Philosophie muss den Sinn konstruieren in Bezug auf die
Irrationalität des Faktums." The interpretative decision to translate Faktum with the register of happening is due to the
deep ambiguity of the alternative word "fact" in English. Faktum does not refer to matters of fact, but to what in life has
no further reason for being the case that its own actuality. This is what Husserl describes by calling a Faktum irrational:
happenings that cannot be rationally accounted for, again from a speciﬁcally ethical and not logico-judicative
perspective.
3 Husserl, Grenzprobleme, 317.
4 See the section subtitled by Ullrich Melle, editor of the volume: "The problem of ethical striving in the face of the irra-
tionality of facticity" [Das Problem des Sinnes ethischen Strebens angesichts der Irrationalitäten der Faktizität] (Husserl,
Grenzprobleme, 378, my translation). Husserl himself writes about "the irrationalities of facticity" and of "the problem of
a possible meaning to my ethical striving and to ours" [(... ) die Irrationalitäten der Faktizität auf das Problem eines
möglichen Sinnes meines und unseres ethischen Strebens] (378, my translation).
5 Husserl, Grenzprobleme, 307, my translation: "Und wie, wenn ich keine Hoﬀnung gewinnen kann, das es je anders wird?
Wie, wenn ich die Welt al seine vernunftlose beurteilen muss, wenn die Schönheit der Natur in Naturrevolitionen
zusammenbricht und meine Schätzung der Menscheit mir abhanden kommt, etwa infolge eine solches Krieges?
Kann ich leven in einer "sinnlosen" Welt?"
114
M. LAFERTÉ-COUTU

to be good in such a world? Husserl answers his own question in the passage cited above:
I simply cannot live in a senseless world; the world must have sense. It is imperative that
the world have sense. The serious diﬃculty, both methodological and existential, or what
Husserl calls "the tragedy of existence," is that "this sense cannot be understood ration-
ally by worldly humans."6 Made in passing, this comment is extremely suggestive: destiny
not only threatens rational strivings with destruction but it cannot be rationally under-
stood.7 Who might understand contingency if not "worldly humans," Husserl does not
say. However, what are the implications, for ethics and phenomenology, of the fact that
human rational practice, and the striving to be an ethical person, can endure despite the
threat that contingency poses to reason?
This central aspect of human life, namely that contingency traverses it through and
through and which ethics makes painfully visible, is usually obscured by the phenomen-
ological attitude. The phenomenological reduction brackets all matters of fact. However,
the factual is not the same as the concrete. Concretely understood, the transcendental ego
is a subject who is correlated to objects and to the world, who lives in an intersubjective
ﬁeld of meaning-formation that is historically constituted, whose surrounding world is a
personal practical world (personale Welt des Praxis), and whose experience is always
dependent, mediately or not, on a lived body.8 Even Husserl's early accounts of phenom-
enological reﬂection make a point of distinguishing reﬂection from notions of abstrac-
tion that would associate the results of the method with abstract concepts.9 As Husserl
develops his account of eidetic variation, the task of a transcendental reﬂection on the
ego is even more clearly not to abstract from natural life but on the contrary to reveal,
amazingly enough, that it is natural life which is in one sense "abstract." The full concre-
tion (Konkretion) of the ego, by contrast, involves the totality of possibilities (der Allheit
der Vermögen) belonging to them. Any natural life, any life lived in the natural attitude,
indeed any naïve practical life, Husserl writes, manifests in a limited form (beschränkte
Form).10
The question that Husserlian ethics now poses is whether accounts of the ego that con-
tinue to bracket the distinctly practical struggle against the contingency of destiny are
uncovering a still abstract layer (abstrakte Schichte) of the transcendental subject.11
What phenomenology ﬁnds, in a search for the concrete meaning of subjectivity that
is informed by ethics, is a person who faces the contingency of destiny, yet who nonethe-
less continues to strive toward her ends, including the striving to be an ethical person.
The Contingency of Destiny
For Husserl, the contingency of destiny cannot, even in principle, be understood ration-
ally. There will always be something about a contingent, irrational happening that cannot
be made sense of from within the motivational context of life. Formulating this problem
6 Husserl, Grenzprobleme, 430, my translation: "dieser Sinn nicht als rational verstehbar ist—für den weltlichen Menschen."
7 Husserl, Grenzprobleme, 378.
8 For Husserl's account of such a personal practical world, see Die Lebenswelt, 307-408.
9 See Husserl, Logical Investigations I, 308-13.
10 Husserl, Zur phänomenologischen Reduktion, 200.
11 Husserl, Zur phänomenologischen Reduktion, 198; Manuscript B III 8, 10a (September/November 1930), cited by Sebas-
tian Luft in "Die Konkretion des Ich und das Problem der Ichspaltung in Husserls phänomenologischer Reduktion," 48
(2003).
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
115

with precision, however, requires distinguishing between many senses of the rational
(vernunftlich) and the understandable (verständlich). The ﬁrst diﬀerence, central to
ethics, is between rational and irrational motivations. The second diﬀerence concerns
whether what happens is motivated at all. Contingency should be understood as charac-
terized by this second sense of irrationality.
First, rational motivations include such things as autonomous choices, personal aes-
thetic valuations, or active acts of remembrance, while irrational ones include passive
associations, deep-seated desires, or pre-reﬂective judgments. Accordingly, the irration-
ality of certain motives does not position them outside a motivational nexus at all,
because they are still motivations. As such, they remain at least in principle understand-
able. Husserl writes: "in spirituality (in der Geistigkeit) there are no limits (Grenzen) to
understandability."12 In a ﬁrst sense, incomprehensibility describes nature, as diﬀerent
from spirit: "Nature is the realm of incomprehensibility (Unverständlichkeit). But the
realm of spirit is that of motivation."13 Or, as Husserl continues:
What is understandable (verständlich) is everything in spirit that has a spiritual genesis,
everything in spirit that appears motivated, i.e. that refers to something motivating (auf
ein Motivierendes verweist). With this, there can also be an incomprehensibility
(Unverständlichkeit).14
Though incomprehensibility remains present within the realm of motivation—motives
may be unconscious, for instance—such motives are always understandable insofar as
they have a spiritual genesis and are part of a complex, subjective and intersubjective,
passive and active, motivational nexus. By contrast, what Husserl calls the "irrationality
of
what
happens"
points
to
completely
diﬀerent
senses
of
irrationality
and
incomprehensibility.15
Even in principle, something contingent cannot be understood. It is without motive.
Contingent events, in other words, have no spiritual genesis. Accordingly, the contin-
gency of destiny is not so much "irrational," as would be an irrational motivation, but
breaks with the distinction between reason and unreason. The diﬃculty of understanding
unconscious drives, for example, is of a completely diﬀerent order than the impossibility
of understanding why, what sense there might be, to my child having died in the war, or
to my country falling prey to fascism. Importantly, for Husserl, such events "have no
12 Husserl, Einleitung in die Ethik, 109. This is another key point for Husserl's personalist ethics because wherever can be
drawn the lines of this understandability is also where lies the border of responsibility: a person could not be held
responsible for what she has even in principle no control over, or no possibility of understanding.
13 Husserl, Einleitung in die Ethik, 107, my translation.
14 Husserl, Einleitung in die Ethik, 109, my translation: "Verständlich im Geiste ist alles, was eine geistige Genesis hat, alles
im Geiste, was motiviert auftritt, also auf ein Motvierendes verweist. Damit ist gesagt, dass es auch Unverständlichkeit
geben kann." He continues, immediately after, to exemplify: "I recall only cases where something sudden, or a sensual
datum, bursts in our life as completely unmotivated. The sudden thing occurs and is brought to consciousness, but in a
strict sense, it has no "genesis." (...) But we need not dwell on these matters" [Ich erinnere nur an jeden Fall, wo in unser
Leben ganz unmotiviert etwa ein Knall, ein sinnliches Datum überhaupt hereinbricht. Der Knall tritt auf und verläuft im
Bewusstsein, aber im exakten Sinn hat er keine "Genesis." (...) Doch dabei dürfen wir nicht verweilen.] In short, even
what appears to be unmotivated has some connection to a broader nexus of motives, even if they are not visible
to us.
15 Husserl, Grenzprobleme, 238. Importantly, Husserl's use of the word Faktum, in this instance, instead of Tatsache,
suggests that the phrase "Irrationalität des Faktums" could be translated as the irrationality of what happens, more
than the irrationality of something like matters of fact. Husserl is talking about certain kinds of events of which the
character is so arbitrary that they are in this evaluative sense incomprehensible. There is no reason why they
happened.
116
M. LAFERTÉ-COUTU

sense" not from a logical or judicative perspective but from an ethical, speciﬁcally valua-
tive one. The death of a child is a legible event in the lifeworld shared by any given com-
munity: it can be discussed and remembered. Husserl is pointing to a diﬀerent kind of
incomprehensibility. Even if we were able to retrace all the causes and variables that
led to the event, something about the death would remain beyond comprehension.
There is no "good" reason, no ethical sense, for it having happened.
In a helpful connection to this sense of incomprehensibility, Husserl's late ethics intro-
duces the notion of absolute values.16 Absolute values, of which the exemplar is love for
one's child, are distinct from objective (gegenständlich) ones in many ways, notably
because they resist rational comprehension. Speciﬁcally, their sense exceeds the grasp
of theoretical consciousness. First, they are absolute because non-relative to changing
motivational circumstances. Any objective value, like the importance of following
traﬃc regulations, is a relative one: its evidence is provisional, subject to the forces of
a developing web of motivations and to a changing world. By contrast, regardless of
the situation, Husserl believes, nothing could ever change the "truth" of a parent's love
for their child.17 Second, these values are singular to the person who feels them.
Husserl even calls them "egocentric."18 Even if many parents love their children, their
love is singular in each case. Third, Husserl describes absolute values as "calling"
(rufen) a person to their truth.19 For example, parental love can take someone over,
calling a person to their vocation (Beruf) as a parent. They live ethically only if they
respond to the call of that value and elevate it to the status of duty, that is, if they
commit to being a good parent in response to an aﬀect of love.
Importantly, that absolute values are independent of motivational circumstances helps
explain why the responsibility they institute endures despite the world being inhospitable
to the realization of those values. In a suggestive thought experiment, Husserl explores
the example of motherly love to show that, even if faced with the imminent annihilation
of the world, the mother would continue to love her child, and this love, this valuing, has
"irrational grounds," in the speciﬁc sense that it cannot be understood as part of a nexus
of motivations.20 In other words, even if all hope seems lost, if I have a child whom I love,
I continue to strive to be a good parent for their sake. In a diﬀerent, even darker thought
experiment, Husserl considers a quintessential existentialist question: "Why should it not
be conceivable that all humans, myself included, killed themselves, convinced of the
16 Husserl, Grenzprobleme, 201-2; 337; 346; 377; 409.
17 Husserl illustrates the "absolute" character of a mother's love by arguing that, even in the event of the imminent
annihilation of the entire world, this love would not falter (Husserl, Edmund. 2014. Grenzprobleme, section 4 to text
24, "Ethical action in the face of senselessness" [Ethisches Handeln angesichts der sinnlosigkeit], 309-13).
18 Husserl, Grenzprobleme, 350;356.
19 The notion of 'attraction of attention' that Husserl discusses in Ideas II in connection to the valuableness of objects in
one's environment (Husserl, Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy, Second
Book-, 194-218), or even the notion of aﬀective pull from his analyses on passive synthesis (Edmund, Analyses Con-
cerning Passive and Active Synthesis, 98; 215; 220; 508) acquires a much stronger meaning. Husserl describes this as the
"call of true values" (Husserl, Grenzprobleme, 350). The full passage lists a suggestive series of calls: "The call of things
themselves, the true. The call of true values. The call of practical values and of the practical best" [Der Ruf der Sachen
selbst, der wahren. Der Ruf wahrer Werte. Der Ruf praktischer Werte und des praktisch Besten].
20 See Husserl, Grenzprobleme, 310, my translation: "And if the mother "knew for certain" that, tomorrow, or in an hour, it
would be the end of the world, would she, as a true mother, during this hour, fail to show her child loving care, con-
solation, etc.? And is it not the same with everything ethical?" [Und wenn die Mutter "sicher wüsste", dass morgen, dass in
einer Stunde der Weltuntergang sei, würde sie als wahre Mutter während dieser Stunde es versäumen, ihrem Kind die lie-
bende Fürsorge, Tröstung etc. zu erweisen? Und ist es nicht mit allem Ethischen änhlich?]
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
117

valuelessness of existence (...)?"21 Husserl's answer is that humans are aﬀected by values
that call them to responsibility for themselves, for others, and for their communities. If
humans were mere performance machines (Leistungsmachine), Husserl observes, the
knowledge of the impossibility of their goals would dissolve their will. Returning to
the example of the mother, he adds: "But what if we think of the mother who cares lov-
ingly for her child?"22 In other words, the diﬀerence between a person aﬀected by values
of love and a performance machine is that only the former is aﬀected by values, and it is
this aﬀect, in this case love, which makes a mother continue to strive even if she somehow
knows that the world is bound to end the day after tomorrow. Importantly, it is also
because Husserl believes values can become duties that he goes as far as to write:
"Even if the world were hell, (...) I would still resist this hell and do my "duty"."23
In short, there is much to add about the signiﬁcance of Husserl introducing such an
account of value to his late ethics. One important implication for present purposes is that
absolute values are motives which cannot themselves be understood, in a way not dissim-
ilar to the contingency of destiny.24 A person's response to the feeling of parental love,
and to the responsibility Husserl believes it institutes, clearly varies and can be the
target of moral judgments. Yet the originary aﬀect—I love my child—cannot be put
into question. In this speciﬁc sense, it resists any rational comprehension. At the root
of ethical strivings lies a value that cannot itself be thematized. The sense of love
exceeds that possibility. Accordingly, "irrationality" is not the most felicitous term to
attach to deep valuative aﬀects either. Instead, it is because absolute values defy the
21 Husserl, Grenzprobleme, 450, my translation. The full passage goes even further: "Why should it not be conceivable that
all humans, me included, killed themselves, convinced of the valuelessness of existence, and killed their dependent
animals after having destroyed all other life, or that, before all other life would be destroyed, only humans extermi-
nated themselves?" [Warum sollte es nicht denkbar sein, dass alle Menschen, mich eingeschlossen, in der Überzeugung des
Unwertes des Daseins sich selbst mordeten, die unmündigen Tiere töteten, vorher etwa alles Leben sonst vernichteten, oder
dass voher alles sonstige Leben vernichtet würde und nun die Menschen sich selbst ausrotteten?]
22 Husserl, Grenzprobleme, 309-10.
23 Husserl, Grenzprobleme, 310.
24 One crucial implication of Husserl's discussion of the contingency of destiny, a contingency that can at any moment
destroy rational strivings themselves and even their originary motives—the persons we love—is that an ethical life
cannot be driven only by absolute values, nor only by objective ones. Instead, it must be accompanied by a
certain kind of belief, or faith (Glaube). Belief is what secures the endurance of a person's commitments over time,
such as "being a good parent." Speciﬁcally, Husserl notes that if one is to wage war (Kampf) against irrationalities
of all kinds, both internal to personal life and those pertaining to the world itself, this can be undertaken only in
the belief that understanding the world teleologically, or that striving toward ideals, is apodictically, practically
valid (Husserl, Grenzprobleme, 482). This brings Husserl very close to a Kantian postulate: if I did not believe that
the world were hospitable to my strivings, I would not strive. See Husserl's Grenzprobleme, 317, where he speaks
of the ethical "as if": "Idea of God, of a world of God. The ethical "as if." The belief from which the ethical will has
its strength" [Idee Gottes, einer Gotteswelt. Das ethische „als ob". Der Glaube, der vom ethischen Willen her seine Kraft
hat]. "Hospitability" in this context simply means that I believe the world not to be unreasonable (vernunftlose);
that my rational action can be believed to be eﬀective; or that I have reason to believe it worthwhile to act. Moreover,
while there is no room here to introduce Husserl's treatment of the idea of God, one observation is that it would be
diﬃcult to reconcile the necessity to postulate God's existence, or to believe in the world's goodness, with Husserl's
remarks about a mother's enduring love for her child in the knowledge that the world will end (see Emmanuel Hous-
set's 2010 Husserl et l'idée de Dieu for a comprehensive treatment of the notion in Husserl). In such a case of utter
hopelessness, no belief in the hospitality of the world is needed for the duty to protect and care for my child to
be upheld. Husserl's remarks on hopelessness and despair in the face of contingency thus raise the pivotal question
for ethics of exactly what kind of belief is necessary for ethical life to be possible. See notably Husserl, Grenzprobleme,
323 my translation: "Believe in the world and in destiny (Schicksal)! Take it as if it were certain it was a good one and
live as if you could ultimately have it be in your service, as if you could force it to be friendly. Live in this certainty and
you will do the best!" [Glaube an die Welt und das Schicksal! Nimm es, als ob es gewiss ein gutes wäre, und lebe so, als ob
du es dir schließlich zu Diensten bringen kannst, als ob du es zwingen, dir freundlich gesinnt machen kannst].
118
M. LAFERTÉ-COUTU

distinction between rational and irrational motivations that they endure even in the face
of doubt or certainty about the meaninglessness of the world.25
A Personalist Ethics: On Life as a Whole
From a Husserlian perspective, the strongest response to the threat that contingency
poses to rational practice is ultimately not belief in a world already designed to be
good, but the enactment of a person's capacity to constitute it as such through the realiz-
ation of her vocations, her values, and of herself. Leading an ethical life means having in
view who we are as persons. Speciﬁcally, leading an ethical life requires having in view
one's life as a whole. This is key to the possibility of having enduring rational commit-
ments to values and ends even in an unpredictable world. Those commitments are motiv-
ated by the broader context of my whole life. A challenge for Husserl's personalist ethics
is then to account for the very possibility of having in view the entirety of one's life in the
ﬁrst place. One avenue of response to this problem comes from the regulative idea of a
true self (wahre Selbst), for which there is an ethical parallel in the idea of my best possible
self.26 Another avenue of response lies in the notion of overview (Überschau) that Husserl
believes is an ability belonging to any ego. Anybody can adopt a fully encompassing grasp
of their life, though this occurs not step-by-step, as it were adding the many parts of life
into one total sum, but in a single grasp.27 The key here is that this grasp targets not the
actualities that make up my life, but that life as a horizon of possibilities. Together, these
two concepts lead to the core ethical insight that life itself is a practical striving, and that it
can be grasped as a whole to yield an idea of myself as a person. For Husserl, ethical life is
an endless task of commitment to this ideal and openness to its constant renewal.
Husserl develops the notion of a "true self" in his Analyses Concerning Passive and
Active Syntheses. He shows that any act of remembrance, for example, necessarily
involves the regulative idea of a true self, because the act is guided by a will to truth.
What I am trying to remember is what truly happened, or rather, what I truly experi-
enced. In principle, my entire past could be recalled, and similarly, my entire future
could be anticipated. If I could have this interconnected past and future in view as an
actuality, this would be fulﬁlling an intention directed to my "self."28 This of course is
25 Another interesting case for aspects of experience that dwell on the limits of understandability is that of instincts.
When Husserl speaks of the "rationality" of instincts, he puts it in brackets ("Vernunft" im Instinkt). Likewise, the
"goals" of their tendencies ("Ziele" ihrer Tendenzen) are not the same as those of the will (Husserl, Grenzprobleme,
86). For example, while a child's upbringing may lead to separation anxiety and create irrational, unconscious motiv-
ations for current behavior, the paradigmatic example of instinct is hunger. Husserl even speciﬁes: "Die Sehnsucht nach
der Speise ist kein Instinkt. Sie ist bestimmtes Begehren. Die Sehnsucht im Hunger, der Hungertrieb ist Instinkt" (Grenz-
probleme, 86). Only about the ﬁrst examples can it be asked "how did this come about"—whether childhood experi-
ences or a particular longing for food—but it of course makes no sense to wonder about the spiritual genesis of
hunger. Husserl sometimes suggests an aﬃnity between motherly love and instincts, probably because both share
this feature that it makes no sense to ask where they come from (See for example Grenzprobleme, 465 or 466).
26 Husserl, Analyses Concerning Passive and Active Synthesis, 161; 256.
27 For a detailed account of the notion of Überschau, see Andrea Staiti's 2013 "A Grasp From Afar: Überschau and the
Givenness of Life in Husserlian Phenomenology" (Continental Philosophy Review. 46:1, 21-36). For an account of the
signiﬁcance of the "wholeness" of life beyond the ethical context for Husserl, see Sara Heinämaa's "On the Complexity
and Wholeness of Human Beings: Husserlian Perspectives" (International Journal of Philosophical Studies. 25:3, 393-
406).
28 See for instance Husserl's Analyses Concerning Passive and Active Syntheses, 161: "Accordingly, the ego strives to check
its memories thoroughly, to clarify them deliberately, to investigate the intentional nexuses with respect to memories'
parts, to disclose the illusion by analyzing, and thus to advance to the true self"; and even more explicitly: "For the ego
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
119

impossible, which is why the "true self" is only regulative. The ethical implication is that
the idea regulating what I am rationally motivated to expect, value, or want—the idea of
my best possible self toward which ethical life strives—similarly structures a striving. The
diﬀerence is that ethical life is not guided by an epistemic value of truth, but by a practical
sense of truth that Husserl elaborates on in his personalist ethics.29 Importantly, for
Husserl, striving to lead an ethical life is not a practice among others, but mobilizes
life as a whole. It cannot be suﬃcient to evaluate isolated acts of valuing and willing. I
could ask myself, for instance: am I taking care of my grandmother because I love her,
or because I am responding to an empty sense of familial duty? With this question, I
am adopting a partial perspective to evaluate the motives of my personal life. Yet for
Husserl, no volition can be considered ethical in isolation from the other wills making
up that life. This is a distinctive feature of the will, by contrast to judgment: "But the
essence of the will is so wonderful that it cannot, like judgment, have its truth in
isolation."30
Accordingly, while it is possible to reﬂect on individual acts of the will and ask about
their motives, the more important practical reﬂection for Husserl targets life as a whole.
But how could a person have a grasp of something that they are still living through? How
to view the whole of something unﬁnished?31 The answer is that the "whole" is not a sum
of actualities or of actual experiences. It does not yield a kind of narrative, for instance,
about who I am, nor does it describe my life as a personal history with a dated beginning
it corresponds to the idea of a true self, to the idea of the true past of consciousness, as the idea of complete self-
giving" (Husserl, Analyses Concerning Passive and Active Syntheses, 256).
29 The criteria for determining what may or may not count as "my best possible self" are numerous in Husserl. Because
this paper focuses on the concrete meaning of subjectivity as personhood in Husserlian phenomenology, and not on
Husserl's account of ethical normativity, the details of the process which would allow a person to come to a "true" idea
of their best self are not developed here. What is clear is that "my best possible self" is in constant need of renewal and
is never determined in isolation from the communities in which persons are embedded. In his lectures and manuscripts
on ethics, Husserl elaborates on the complexities of such a process—to determine the best possible version of myself.
Criteria include the intuition of values that motivate the will (Husserl, Grenzprobleme, 269; Husserl, Vorlesungen über
Ethik und Wertlehre, 205), the concordance of many vocations (see for instance Husserl, Grenzprobleme, 517-8, where
he discusses the striving to blessedness (Seligkeit), which is connected to concordance (Einstimmigkeit)), the givenness
of volitional intentions in evidence (Husserl, Vorlesungen über Ethik und Wertlehre 1908-1914, 142-43), and personal
and social hierarchies of values (Husserl, Einleitung in die Ethik, 244), and other considerations. For example, if a
person reﬂects on their commitment to their religious vocation, they may realize that it has for some time now
not been motivated by intuitive values, but only by mechanical habit and ritual (Husserl, Grenzprobleme, 269). This
can become an opportunity to renew or critique the regulative idea of their best self. About hierarchies of values,
one of Husserl's examples is thievery (Husserl, Einleitung in die Ethik, 250). There are "good" and "bad" thieves, but
for Husserl, the speciﬁcally moral evaluation of that vocation comes not from whether it is rationally motivated but
from social hierarchies of values. Though Husserl never presents a systematic account of "how to be your best
self," the lack of a deﬁnitive or ﬁxed method can be read as reﬂecting the broader idea that ethical life is an attitude
toward oneself and the world more than a set of rules to follow that would guarantee one is indeed doing their best. At
the same time, this does not mean Husserl brushes the importance of those questions aside. On the contrary, he called
the question of practical and axiological truth and evidence, and the possibility of sciences of axiology and praxis, a
"supremely diﬃcult and wide-ranging groups of problems" (Husserl, Ideas I, 278, footnote 13).
30 See Husserl, Einleitung in die Ethik, 253, my translation: "Aber so wunderbar ist das Wesen des Wollens, dass es nicht wie
das Urteilen seine Wahrheit in der Isolierung haben kann."
31 This is one of the many fascinating points of connection between Husserl's approach, in these late manuscripts, and
Heidegger's phenomenology. The meaning of Dasein's being-a-whole is the guiding question of division two of Being
and Time and is the question that leads Heidegger to the problem of temporality (Heidegger, Being and Time. Trans.
John Macquarrie and Edward Robinson. Oxford: Blackwell, 279-311). Heidegger faces a similar diﬃculty: how to under-
stand Dasein's ability to relate to their life in its entirety, if it is only upon death that this life will be "completed."
Though the crucial diﬀerence is that Husserl does not turn to ﬁnitude, Husserl does also see that the solution lies
in a transformation of how a person relates to her life. Remarkably, leading an ethical life, for Husserl, thus shares
this feature with authentic being-towards-death, and authentic existence in general, that it grasps life as a whole,
indeed as a full, concrete universe of possibilities.
120
M. LAFERTÉ-COUTU

and an anticipated end. Rather, such a spanning, panoramic overview of my past, present,
and future, makes self-determination of my life as a whole possible in the ﬁrst place: "I
can carry out a universal critique of my life up to the present moment and at the same
time be determinate to shape my entire life (...)".32 The grasp is fully encompassing
and happens in one step because past and future are apprehended "at the same time."
I can have an idea of myself that is informed by my past and that includes my ambitions
for the future. This is not the same as self-narrative, but only yields an idea toward which
I strive. The important implication is that without the possibility of an Überschau, of
making my entire life "present" to myself, I could never make, maintain, or modify voca-
tional decisions spanning that life, such as the commitment to be a good parent, become
an artist, enter a speciﬁc profession, or simply, be a "better person." In short, for Husserl,
if the ego were incapable of such an encompassing grasp of their life, no acts of self-deter-
mination would be made at all. The Überschau thus not only accounts for the possibility
of ethical life but for how a person can maintain her commitments over time despite the
threat of contingency.
Importantly, grasping life as a whole does not require that ethical life be homogenizing
the multiplicity of strivings making up a life. Such a grasp is possible not despite the mul-
tiplicity of vocations but because life is a striving. Accordingly, to be directed toward the
whole is not the same as striving for self-coincidence. Instead, for Husserl, a person wants
her many vocations to be concordant (einstimmig), or harmonized.33 Speciﬁcally, the aim
is to no longer feel internal tension, dissatisfaction, or disappointment with oneself. At
the same time, Husserl also writes: "The wish to live in joy is legitimate. But the
higher goal of living in joy all the time is illegitimate, unreasonable."34 In other words,
striving toward concordance (Einstimmigkeit) is not accompanied by the wish to be
happy all the time. One way to read this comment is to consider the arbitrary force of
contingency. Wishing to reach a permanent state of peace and happiness over and
against all obstacles to self-realization would betray a deep naïveté about what it
means to lead an ethical life in an unpredictable world.
In a helpful connection to the notion of concordance (Einstimmigkeit), Husserl
describes personal life as having a certain style (Stil).35 Having a style is about being con-
sequent, and about having a personality that is singularly my own, more than it is about
32 Husserl, Erste Philosophie (1923/1924), 154. Cited by Andrea Staiti in "A Grasp from Afar: Überschau and the givenness of
life in Husserlian phenomenology," 28.
33 In the Grenzprobleme, Husserl develops this notion of concordance (Einstimmigkeit) in the ethical context alongside the
complex idea of "blessedness" (Seligkeit). Humans strive to lead concordant and blessed lives. To be blessed would be
to be ﬁlled with a deep joy, with a non-naïve happiness, and with love. And a person wants her many goals and voca-
tions to be concordant because inherent to the structure of striving is also a yearning for satisfaction (Befriedigung) and
peace. See Husserl, Grenzprobleme, 416: "Love is a personal decision of active "feelings," and it is fulﬁlled love in the
blessedness of the I." [Die Liebe ist personale Entscheidung des aktiven "Gemüts", und sich erfüllende Liebe ist Seligkeit im
Ich]. Husserl also often uses Seligkeit interchangeably with "Glückseligkeit" (for example at Grenzprobleme, 430; 517).
Moreover, Husserl believes that these strivings to blessedness and concordance are ultimately aiming for something
unreachable, because their end lies beyond the limited and ﬁnite scope of human life: it would take an eternity to truly
become blessed. Husserl speaks of blessedness as eternal: Blessedness = "eternal" blessedness" [Seligkeit = "ewige"
Seligkeit"] (Grenzprobleme, 487, footnote 2). These notions introduce substantial complexity to Husserl's ethics, and
they cannot be fully developed here. Nevertheless, they reveal at least two things: 1) ethical life is structured by striv-
ings that are impossible to realize, and importantly, 2) without these desires for blessedness, peace, concordance, and
satisfaction, a person would not be motivated to strive to be good in the same manner.
34 Husserl, Grenzprobleme, 329, my translation: "Der Wunsch, in Freuden zu leben, ist rechtmäßig. Aber das oberste Ziel,
immerzu in Freuden zu leben, ist unrechtmäßig, ist unvernünftig."
35 Husserl, Grenzprobleme, 491.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
121

agreeing with oneself. Accordingly, it is closely tied to motivation and to habit formation.
Just as there is a style to current perceptions or to remembrance, so too there is a style to
my entire personal life. My style is the way my life unfolds, as arranged by interrelated
motives and habitually determined behaviours.36 The importance of habits in connection
to style, and not simply to motivations, is that they account for why the ego does not
exercise self-preservation (Selbsterhaltung) arbitrarily.37 While Husserl notes that
habits can contribute to failures to reﬂect on "blind tendencies" and lead to errors in
moral assessments, they are central to "what sort of personal subject I am."38 If ethical
life is about striving to become the best possible person, a certain level of self-knowledge
always accompanies self-reﬂection, critique, and renewal.39 At the same time, no self-
determination can involve an act of complete freedom. The key phenomenological
insight is that a person cannot freely decide "who they are," nor what they are rationally
motivated to judge, value or will, independently of their motivational situation. Instead,
Husserl writes, about ethical life speciﬁcally:
But I must freely shape my life in its totality (Ganzheit) in accordance with this style (Stil),
and do so in such a way that all such particular disappointments ﬁt into [it] (...).40
Style is connected to the idea of the wholeness of life. My singular style connects the
interrelated motives and the habitual ways of willing, valuing and judging that make
up my life. This includes passive motivations, current and habitual perceptions, judg-
ments, valuations, and volitions, along with all the commitments that were crossed out
and abandoned. To freely shape my life as a whole, as ethics demands, means to do so
in accordance with a style. The style of my life is something I do not completely self-deter-
mine. It is partly shaped by habits, associations, and even deep aﬀects like absolute values.
Freely determining who I am, striving toward the regulative idea of my best self, then
necessarily involves a certain level of acceptance, of responsiveness to the motives
which already make up this life I call mine.
In sum, Husserl's personalistic ethics mobilizes the concepts of motivation and striv-
ing to yield the idea of life as a whole, and this idea becomes regulative. Husserlian ethics
is not primarily concerned with establishing criteria for making moral decisions or deter-
mining good actions but develops an account of an ethical spanning outlook on life, even
of a certain attitude.41 By grasping life as a whole, in such a reﬂective and practically
oriented attitude, life can be lived in truth, or what is the same for Husserl, ethically.
36 Husserl notes that questions about what secures the rational behavior of the subject are "fundamental questions of
ethics" (Husserl, Ideas II, 233).
37 Husserl, Ideas II, 265.
38 Husserl, Ideas II, 262.
39 Husserl distinguishes, however, between speciﬁc habits and the idea of a habitual style, more relevant to personalist
ethics and the idea of life as a whole. For example, might have the habit to drink coﬀee in the morning. But a habitual
style is connected to my character and personality, and my manner of being motivated (Husserl, Ideas II, 261, footnote
1).
40 Husserl, Grenzprobleme, 491, my translation. The whole passage reads as follows: "Aber Mein Leben in seiner Ganzheit
muss sich diesem Stil gemäß von mir her frei formen lassen, und so, dass alle solchen Sonderenttäuschungen sich dem
Stil einfügen lassen, dass ich ihnen, sei es auch als Durchstreichungen, den Stilsinn (und) Funktion für die Ganzheitform
erteilen kann."
41 Husserl discusses the notion of an "ethical attitude" in his 1920/1924 lecture on ethics, Einleitung in die Ethik (244-47).
Even if it is practical, such an attitude contrasts with the personalist attitude, insofar as it involves a practical self-reﬂec-
tion and is thus not simply a version of the natural attitude. Husserl also distinguishes the ethical attitude from an
axiological attitude, which would be centered only on value.
122
M. LAFERTÉ-COUTU

Concreteness and the Transcendental Person
Struggling against contingency is part of what it means to be a person. The question
ethics poses is now whether this feature of personhood has signiﬁcance for transcenden-
tal phenomenological investigations. This paper argues that it does, and this can be
shown by turning to the meaning of what Husserl calls the "full concreteness of the
ego."42 Concreteness can mean many things for Husserl. Most broadly, it simply refers
to the concrete world and to the concrete human lives that phenomenology describes.
However, its more precise meaning concerns contents of experience. The objective diﬀer-
ence between abstract and concrete contents is deﬁned in terms of whether they are
respectively non-independent or independent. For example, a tree is an independent
content, grasped as a whole, while some of its properties, such as its color and shape,
are non-independent. Simply put, the greenness or height of a tree could not be given
in experience if I was not perceiving that tree. This crucial distinction between abstract
and concrete contents transfers to the subjective side of experience, and speciﬁcally to the
possibility of apprehending the ego concretely. For transcendental phenomenology, that
is a central question: how can the ego be given in experience as fully concrete, i.e. not as
an abstraction but as an independent content? As ethical considerations show, the ego
should be understood concretely as a person.
The Full Concretion of Subjectivity
The pure ego, as an identical pole of experience, is an abstraction. It is only an abstract
moment of a concrete ego and is non-independent of concrete intentional life. In the case
of the eidos "transcendental ego," the phenomenologist is looking for a concrete essence,
or what is the same, an absolutely independent essence.43 Husserl writes:
From the Ego as identical pole, and as substrate of habitus, we distinguish the ego taken in
full concreteness—in that we take, in addition, that without which the Ego cannot after all be
concrete. (The ego, taken in full concreteness, we propose to call by the Leibnizian name:
monad.) The Ego can be concrete only in the ﬂowing multiformity of his intentional life,
along with the objects meant—and in some cases constituted as existent for him—in that
life.44
Husserl is talking about any ego: both the transcendental and personal ego, after all,
can be grasped either in their concreteness or through some of their abstract
moments. What is it exactly that the transcendental ego cannot be concrete
without? First, neither an egoic pole of experience, nor even a substrate of habitus,
are enough for the ego to be concrete, Husserl argues, because a surrounding world
(Umwelt) is lacking. In this sense, the transcendental subject is already a concretization
of the transcendental ego, i.e. as now understood in correlation to objects and the
world. Notably, the Leibnizian concept of monad partly serves to illustrate this
point: the concrete ego includes the whole constituted world within itself—a "trans-
cendent" world.
42 See Husserl, Cartesian Mediations, paragraphs 33 and 47, pp.67-9 and 103-105.
43 As Husserl writes in Ideas I, "An essence that is dependent is called an abstractum; an essence that is absolutely inde-
pendent is called a concretum" (Edmund, Ideas for a Pure Phenomenology and Phenomenological Philosophy, 30).
44 Husserl, Cartesian Meditations, 67-8.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
123

A second reason for Husserl's use of the term monad is that the phenomenological
epoche and primordial reduction, as developed in the Cartesian Mediations, bracket all
foreignness to the ego to discover the correlation between ego and world and thereby
reach the ego's sphere of ownness (Eigenheit). Another aspect of full concretion is thus
this sphere which is preserved in the transition from my personal ego to the pure ego.45
Husserl speciﬁes: "I phantasy [ﬁngiere] only myself as if I were otherwise; I do not phantasy
others."46 Both aspects are included in monadic concretion, namely 1) that all actualities
and potentialities of the stream of experience are "mine," and 2) that the intentional object,
along with the world, belong to this concretion. Husserl writes:
In this manner it becomes clear that the ego, taken concretely, has a universe of what is
peculiarly his own, which can be uncovered by an original explication of his apodictic "ego
sum"—(...). Within this "original sphere" (the sphere of original self-explication) we ﬁnd
also a "transcendent world", (...). But, provided only that they are subjected to our reduction
to what is included in the ego's ownness, all the corresponding illusions, phantasies, "pure"
possibilities, and eidetic objectivities, which oﬀer themselves as "transcendent", likewise
belong in this domain—the domain of my peculiarly own essentiality, of what I am in
myself, in my full concreteness or (as we may also say) what I am in myself as this monad.47
There is a primordial or originary layer to experience that is distinctly my own and where
others do not come into play.48 For present purposes, the more important point than the
relation between concrete subjectivity and intersubjectivity is that, though full concretion
includes the world and might exclude consideration for the actuality or potentiality of
others, it also excludes all the facts (Tatsache). Since any fact can be understood as exem-
plifying a pure possibility, the transcendental ego comprises only pure possibilities, i.e. all
possible variants "of my de facto ego."49 Through the method of transcendental analysis,
"step by step in the intentional uncovering of my "monad"," I uncover what about me is
"essentially determined." In other words, Husserl makes it abundantly clear throughout
the fourth and ﬁfth meditations that the eidos transcendental ego is "removed from all
factualness."50 How then could the contingency of destiny have any bearing on it? To
grasp the full concretion and absolute independence of the essence "transcendental
ego," must the contingency of destiny be bracketed, or must it be retained, because
without it, transcendental subjectivity would still not be "fully concrete"?
The Transcendental Person
Ethics does not change the relation of facts to the universe of pure possibilities.51 What it
discovers is that when engaging in rational practice, a person struggles against the
45 Ibid., 100-101.
46 Ibid., 72.
47 Ibid., 105.
48 Even at this level, the sphere of ownness can only be constituted based on an intersubjective ﬁeld of constitution. The
complex relationship between ownness and structures of intersubjectivity is discussed at length in the ﬁfth meditation,
very extensively in the three Husserliana volumes on intersubjectivity, and at other key moments such as the discus-
sion of intersubjective reduction in the Basic Problems lectures (Edmund, The Basic Problems of Phenomenology. From
the Lectures, Winter Semester, 1910-1911. Trans. Ingo Farin and James G. Hart. Dordrecht: Springer, 91-104). This will
not however be a focus of the present paper.
49 Husserl, Cartesian Meditations, 71.
50 Ibid., 70.
51 Husserl also writes that phenomenological self-explication "gives the facts their place in the corresponding universe of
pure (or eidetic) possibilities. This explication therefore concerns my de facto ego, only so far as the latter is one of the
124
M. LAFERTÉ-COUTU

contingency of destiny. While phenomenology opens a ﬁeld of transcendental conscious-
ness devoid of any dependence on the facts, the key distinction lies in the diﬀerence
between the facts themselves and a certain notion of facticity. Only the latter can have
signiﬁcance for transcendental subjectivity, namely that rational strivings cannot avoid
unpredictability. One concept, which appears in a 1930 text on the phenomenological
reduction, suggests that Husserl's late ethics does involve an account of personhood
that can be translated to transcendental phenomenology. The full concretion of the trans-
cendental ego, Husserl writes, can be encapsulated by the suggestive though little devel-
oped notion of the "transcendental person."52 Understood concretely, the "I think" is not
just a subject correlated to a surrounding world, but a person correlated to a personal
practical world (personale Welt des Praxis). The inclusion of personhood in the transcen-
dental sphere of experience, along with its correlation to the practical world, is the central
clue to understanding the transcendental signiﬁcance of contingency.53
A ﬁrst question is how personhood can be characterized as "transcendental." In the
Crisis, Husserl deﬁnes the transcendental as follows:
It is the motif of inquiring back into the ultimate source of all the formations of knowledge,
the motif of the knower's reﬂecting upon himself and his knowing life in which all the scien-
tiﬁc structures that are valid for him occur purposively, (...). This source bears the title I-
myself, with all of my actual and possible knowing life and, ultimately, my concrete life in
general.54
Part of the complexity of the concept of "transcendental person" is that it deepens the
meaning of what Husserl here calls "my concrete life in general." The transcendental
person is not just another a priori structure of consciousness. Husserl presents it as
nothing less than what phenomenology is ultimately searching for! A look at Husserl's
personalist ethics reveals that to grasp the ego concretely, it is necessary to have in
view life as a whole. And this is possible once we understand that the ego is also a
person. In other words, the transcendental person describes the full concretion of the
transcendental ego because it accounts for all the pure possibilities belonging to her as
a person, but also because it shows that intentional life, as personal life, is structured
by a whole horizon of such possibilities.
Before introducing the notion of the transcendental person, Husserl conﬁrms the need
to grasp egoic life in its entirety to grasp it in full concreteness. He discusses how diﬀerent
iterations of transcendental subjectivity, while more concrete than a naïve and non-
reﬂexive understanding of subjectivity, are still not "fully concrete":
When the transcendental epoche, and in it, the transcendentally experiencing reﬂection, sets
in and reveals the transcendental being and life that previously remained anonymous in the
naturalness of existence, transcendental subjectivity is not yet unveiled in full concretion. The
pure possibilities to be acquired by his free phantasy-variation (ﬁctive changing)" (Husserl, Cartesian Meditations, 84).
Note that the "only" in this passage was crossed out by Husserl.
52 Husserl, Zur phänomenologischen Reduktion, 200.
53 Sebastian Luft, in what appears to be the only commentary on this concept of the transcendental person, argues that
the term testiﬁes to Husserl's increasing proximity to Heidegger in his later thinking, precisely because of the connec-
tion between transcendental personhood and the Heideggerian notion of facticity (Luft, Sebastian. 2005. "Husserl's
Concept of the 'Transcendental Person': Another Look at the Husserl-Heidegger Relationship." International Journal
of Philosophical Studies. 13:2, 141-177). See also his later "The Subject as Moral Person. On Husserl's Late Reﬂections
Concerning the Concept of Personhood" (2012).
54 Husserl, The Crisis of the European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology, 98.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
125

new, already transcendental sphere of experience itself still has the horizon of the transcen-
dental constituting subject, a higher anonymous and transcendental horizon. The same
applies to the unveiling that is now possible, and so on iteratively. Only through the
ability of the transcendental ego, the ability to become conscious of this iteration in its
inﬁnity, to grasp as a whole (überschauen) this uniform and-so-on, and through this
ability, to grasp and ﬁx the essential form of this inﬁnity—(...) only thereby do I gain my
fully concrete transcendental subjectivity as horizon.55
The transcendental epoche and transcendental reﬂection are insuﬃcient to yield the full
concretion of the transcendental ego. Even if they do open a ﬁeld of experience by
respectively bracketing all objective validities and reﬂecting on the ego, the ego can
reﬂect on herself again within this ﬁeld and do so repeatedly in an inﬁnity of iterations.
In addition to these methodological steps, Husserl suggests, is needed the very same
ability that is so central to his personalist ethics, namely a fully encompassing grasp
that targets this inﬁnite iteration, an Überschau. Husserl already indicates, in the Carte-
sian Meditations, that intentional life cannot be understood concretely unless it is
grasped as a whole.56 Here, he uses the term "transcendental person" to account for
this whole. He writes:
The transcendental ego, as the pole and substrate of the totality of faculties, is, so to speak,
the transcendental person who comes to primary institution (Urstiftung) through the phe-
nomenological reduction, who enters into the universality of the concrete transcendental,
and who appropriates the fully encompassing life that brings all possibilities into play
and develops all possible modes of exercising self-preservation (Selbserhaltung).57
The reference to fully encompassing life once again conﬁrms the importance of grasping
life as a whole to grasp it in full concretion. Husserl is describing the ideal of a universal
human vocation: to be the most concrete version of a person possible, to be a transcen-
dental person, where all pure possibilities belonging to the ego are "brought into play."
What is more, the transcendental person comes to primary institution, which means that
a unity of sense—the person—has been instituted according to initial motives and an idea
that will need to be continually renewed. The parallels with ethical life are numerous: in a
moment of conversion, in a change of attitudes, in a moment of resolve to respond to the
call of values, a person concretizes her relation to her deepest self by committing to an
55 Husserl, Zur phänomenologischen Reduktion, 198-9, my translation and my emphasis added: "Wenn die transzenden-
tale Epoché und in ihr die transzendental-erfahrende Reﬂexion einsetzt und das vordem in der Natürlichkeit des
Daseins anonym verbliebene transzendentale, die Natürlichkeit konstituierende Sein und Leben enthüllt, so ist die
transzendentale Subjektivität noch nicht in voller Konkretion enthüllt. Die neue schon transzendentale Erfahrungs-
sphäre hat selbst wieder ihren Horizont des sie transzendentale-konstituierenden Subjektiven, einen höheren anon-
ymen und transzendentalen Horizont. Für die nun mögliche Enthüllung desselben gilt oﬀenbar dasselbe, und so
iterativ. Nur durch die Vermöglichkeit des transzendentalen Ich, des Vermögens, dieser Iteration bewusst zu
warden in ihrer Unendlichkeit, so im Und-so-weiter einheitlich zu überschauen, dazu die Wesensform dieser Unen-
dlichkeit in der Vermöglichkeit zu erfasse und zu ﬁxieren—(...), nur dadurch gewinne ich meine voll konkrete trans-
zendentale Subjektivität als Horizont."
56 See also paragraphs 39 and 40 of Husserl's Crisis, "The peculiar character of the transcendental epoche as a total
change of the natural attitude of life" and "The diﬃculties surrounding the genuine sense of performing the total
epoche. The temptation to misconstrue it as a with-holding of all individual validities, carried out step by step"
(Husserl, The Crisis, 148-50).
57 Husserl, Zur phänomenologischen Reduktion, 200, my translation and emphasis added: "Das transzendentale Ich als Pol
und als Substrat der Allheit der Vermögen ist sozusagen die transzendentale Person, die durch die phänomenologische
Reduktion zur Urstiftung kommt, die in die Universalität des konkreten Transzendentalen eintretend sich das voll
umfassende, das alle Vermöglichkeiten ins Spiel bringende Leben zueignet und alle nun möglichen Modi, Selbserhal-
tung zu üben, zur Ausbildung bringen kann."
126
M. LAFERTÉ-COUTU

idea of herself toward which she strives, thereby exercising self-preservation, indeed
enduring over time as a person despite the contingency of destiny.
So, who is the transcendental person? What is the diﬀerence between a transcendental
person and an ethical one? In ethical life, where no transcendental epoche and reﬂection
have been performed, a person would clearly not, even if reﬂecting on their life as a
whole, have in view the totality of possibilities belonging to fully concrete transcendental
subjectivity. An ethical person is only reﬂecting on what is practically possible for her in
her personal context. Just as Husserl describes habitual life as a "limited form" of trans-
cendental subjectivity, so too ethical life, even if it involves practical self-reﬂection, is
another instance of such a limited form, albeit a non-naïve one. In other words, an
ethical person is clearly not a transcendental person.
While Husserl's late ethics and transcendental phenomenology both involve a reﬂec-
tion on life as a whole, a major diﬀerence is that ethics makes use of practical reason and
phenomenology is guided by theoretical reason.58 However, the most substantial diﬀer-
ence is that phenomenology involves an even more concrete grasp of the subject than
ethics. Though an ethical attitude may grant me a more concrete grasp of my own
essence, only phenomenology makes it possible to apprehend the concrete essence of
subjectivity—as absolutely independent. The transcendental person, as the fully concrete
transcendental subject, is the ideal toward which phenomenology itself strives, and is no
longer, as in the case of ethics, dependent on personal context and ability. What person-
alist ethics shows, however, is that this is a deeply ethically informed account of the task
of phenomenology. For Husserl, human beings have a responsibility to grasp subjectivity
in full concretion, as the concrete ground of all strivings toward truth, values and ends.
The Responsibility to Lead Concrete Lives
The responsibility to lead concrete lives means that persons ought to reﬂect on who they
are, on the motives of their strivings, and on their life as a whole horizon of possibility,
despite the threat of contingency to rational practice. Consider Husserl's diagnosis of the
"present condition" of the European sciences in the introduction to Formal and Trans-
cendental Logic:
The belief that science leads to wisdom—to an actually rational self-cognition, to a life
somehow to be shaped closer to perfection, a life truly worth living, a life of "happiness",
contentment, well-being, or the like—this great belief, once the substitute for religious
belief, has (at least in wide circles) lost its force. Thus men live entirely in a world that
has become unintelligible, in which they ask in vain for the wherefore, the sense, which
was once so doubtless and accepted by the understanding, as well as by the will.59
This passage is revealing of Husserl's understanding that pursuing transcendental phe-
nomenology does not yield happiness. The striving of reason for truth is indiﬀerent to
58 This ﬁrst parallel holds at least for Husserl's description of the phenomenological attitude through his discussion of the
transcendental person and the Crisis texts, even if the Cartesian Mediations propose a path toward transcendental sub-
jectivity that does not require the same wholistic grasp.
59 Husserl, Formal and Transcendental Logic, 5.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
127

subjective dispositions of hope and despair.60 Yet what becomes apparent here is the deep
ethical motivation for Husserl's insistence on the necessity to engage in radical investi-
gations of sense (Besinnung): it is no excuse to give up the task of justifying "our scientiﬁc
culture," just because "we are unable to explicate its sense rationality, to determine the
true range of its sense, the range within which we can self-responsibly justify the sense
of our culture and, with our continued labour, make this sense actual."61 The stakes of
establishing the very possibility of transcendental phenomenology are that, without it,
the world would indeed remain unintelligible, and we would be asking in vain about
the meaning, truth and goodness of our lives. Husserl believes it is imperative to separate
scientiﬁc responsibility "from the whole complex of responsibilities belonging to human
life as such."62 The reason for such separation, however, is profoundly ethical. We have a
responsibility to investigate the pure possibilities and necessities that structure the for-
mation of sense (Sinnbildung) before we can evaluate the goodness of any "actualities
in judging, valuing, and acting."63 The implication for Husserl is that, otherwise, we
would be resourceless in the face of contingency, arbitrariness, or the unintelligibility
of the world. Recall that for him, "the world must make "sense"" (Die Welt muss einen
„Sinn" haben).64 The task of philosophy is to secure the possibility of sense despite
"the irrationality of what happens" (die Irrationalität des Faktums).65 This responsibility
is a responsibility to grasp the absolute ground of sense-formation, namely the transcen-
dental ego in full concretion. As this paper has argued, that means the transcendental
person.
Transcendental phenomenology alone may not make us happy. That much may be
obvious. Ethics, the striving to lead a good, genuine life, is not reducible to transcendental
phenomenology. Nevertheless, one way to conceive the Husserlian account of the
relationship between ethics and phenomenology, or between an ethical person and the
transcendental person, is that grasping the possibility of either one is impossible
without grasping the possibility of the other. On the one hand, phenomenology is a voca-
tion. Transcendental phenomenology has clear ethical motives and ends, chief among
them to secure the possibility of truth despite contingency, and to reveal the relation
between truth, in all spheres of reason, and concrete subjectivity. On the other hand,
if transcendental phenomenology alone cannot evaluate or "take position" toward
what is actual in personal and communal life, it does allow a person, and a community,
to grasp ethics as a possibility even "in a world that has become unintelligible."66 In short,
while Husserl never argues that an ethical person needs to be a phenomenologist, he does
60 For an early account of this point in Husserl, see Lev Shestov's "In Memory of a Great Philosopher: Edmund Husserl"
(1962). Phenomenology of reason is unequipped, for Shestov, to either appreciate the immeasurable weight of human
suﬀering or to dispel the compelling and almost bewitching power of self-evidence. The problem with Husserlian phe-
nomenology, in other words, is its unwavering trust in reason: either there are absolute truths—to be precise, either
sense can be given in apodictic evidence—or truth is relative to human existence, and "we are all insane" ("In
Memory," 467). Shestov notes that the ﬁrst option, though it may avoid insanity, does not yield happiness. It does
not console human ills to put one's faith in reason, insofar as reason is "not concerned about our hopes or
despair" (463). Even more problematically, for Shestov, someone who, like Husserl and unlike Kierkegaard, entrusts
their destiny to reason alone cannot stand "with open eyes before the horrors of being" (465).
61 Husserl, Formal and Transcendental Logic, 5.
62 Ibid., 5.
63 Ibid., 6.
64 Husserl, Grenzprobleme, 238.
65 Ibid., 238.
66 Husserl, Formal and Transcendental Logic, 5-6.
128
M. LAFERTÉ-COUTU

believe that phenomenology, by securing the ground of rational strivings in concrete
transcendental subjectivity, does account for why striving to be good in a seemingly sen-
seless world can still be considered rational practice.
Conclusion
Ethical considerations reveal that, when concretely understood, the transcendental ego is a
person who is correlated to a world of practice, whose life as a whole has a personal style,
and importantly, who struggles against the contingency of destiny. The Husserlian
approach to ethics thus sees that the overarching goal of intentional life is not primarily
theoretical but practical. If the world must make sense, and if philosophy takes on this
task to make sense of the world despite the irrationality of what happens, the search for
the fully concrete meaning of the ego is driven by ethical motives.67 There are many advan-
tages to understanding the transcendental ego concretely as a person. First, it responds to
the problem of contingency and shows the ethical signiﬁcance of the endurance of the
subject over time. A subject is a person who continues to strive for self-realization and
self-preservation despite facing the incomprehensible, and this is possible through an
encompassing grasp of life as a whole. Second, this explains why other commitments,
not just to oneself, but to values and ends, to others and to communities, can be maintained
as rational when evaluated in the broader motivational context of personal and social life.
Third, that the correlation between subject and world is a correlation between a person and
her personal practical world de-centralizes judgment and perception from personal life
and aﬃrms the interrelatedness of theoretical, practical, and axiological intentions.68
Fourth, Husserl's grappling with the problem of contingency shows that ethics and phe-
nomenology are driven by parallel goals, namely, to understand the ego concretely, and
that this means grasping intentional life as a whole horizon of possibilities. Only by under-
standing conscious life concretely as a horizon of possibilities does Husserl believe we can
then take position toward what is actual.
Disclosure Statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the author(s).
References
Heidegger, Martin. Sein und Zeit. Tübingen: Max Niemeyer Verlag, 2006.
Heidegger, Martin. Being and Time. Trans. Dennis J. Schmidt and Joan Stambaugh. New York:
State University of New York Press, 2010.
Heinämaa, Sara. 'Husserl's Ethics of Renewal: A Personalistic Approach'. In New Perspectives on
Aristotelianism and Its Critics. eds. Miira Tuominen, Sara Heinämaa, and Virpi Mäkinen.
Leiden: Brill, 2014.
67 Husserl, Grenzprobleme, 238.
68 In the texts collected in the Lebenswelt volume, Husserl even identiﬁes this expression (a personal practical world) with
the lifeworld itself. See notably chapter VI, quite helpfully titled "The Lifeworld as the Personal World of Praxis and as
the World of ﬁnite interests that limit practical ends" [Die Lebenswelt as Personale Welt des Praxis und Welt der von
Praktischen Zielen Begrenzen Endlichen Erkenntnisinteressen] (Husserl, Die Lebenswelt, 307-408). See also for example
Husserl, First Philosophy. Lectures 1923/1924, 227.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
129

Heinämaa, Sara. 'On the Complexity and Wholeness of Human Beings: Husserlian Perspectives'.
International Journal of Philosophical Studies 25, no. 3 (2017): 393-406.
Housset, Emmanuel. Husserl et l'idée de dieu. Paris: Les éditions du Cerf, 2010.
Husserl, Edmund. Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie,
Erstes Buch: Allgemeine Einführung in die reine Phänomenologie. Tübingen: Niemeyer, 1913.
Husserl, Edmund. Cartesianische Meditationen und Pariser Vorträge. Ed. S. Strasser. The Hague:
Martinus Nijhoﬀ, 1950.
Husserl, Edmund. Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie.
Zweites Buch: Phänomenologie Untersuchungen zur Konsituttion. Ed. Marly Biemel. The
Hague: Marinus Nijhoﬀ, 1952.
Husserl, Edmund. Erste Philosophie I (1923-1924): Kritische Ideen Ideengeschichte. Ed. Rudolf
Boehm. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoﬀ, 1956.
Husserl, Edmund. Erste Philosophie II (1923-1924): Theorie der phänomenologischen Reduktion.
Ed. Rudolf Boehm. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoﬀ, 1959.
Husserl, Edmund. Analysen zur passive Synthesis: Aus Vorlesuns- und Forschungsmanuskripten
1918-1926. Ed. Margot Fleischer. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoﬀ, 1966.
Husserl, Edmund. Formal and transcendental Logic. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoﬀ, 1969.
Husserl, Edmund. The Crisis of the European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology: An
Introduction to Phenomenological Philosophy. Trans. David Carr. Evanston: Northwestern
University Press, 1970.
Husserl, Edmund. Zur Phänomenologie der Intersubjektivität. Texte aus dem Nachlass. Erster Teil:
1905-1920. Ed. Iso Kern. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoﬀ, 1973.
Husserl, Edmund. Zur Phänomenologie der Intersubjektivität. Texte aus dem Nachlass. Zweiter
Teil: 1921-1928. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoﬀ, 1973.
Husserl, Edmund. Formale und Transzendentale Logik: Versuch einer Kritik der logischen
Vernunft. Ed. Paul Janssen. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoﬀ, 1974.
Husserl, Edmund. Zur Phänomenologie der Intersubjektivität. Texte aus dem Nachlass. Dritter Teil:
1929-1935. Ed. Iso Kern. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoﬀ, 1974.
Husserl, Edmund. Logische Untersuchungen. Erster Band. Prolegomena zur reinen Logik. Ed. Elma
Holenstein. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoﬀ, 1975.
Husserl, Edmund. Logische Untersuchungen. Zweiter Band. Erster Teil. Untersuchungen zur
Phänomenologue und Theorie der Erkenntnis. Ed. Ursula Panzer. Dordrecht: Kluwer
Academic Publishers, 1984.
Husserl, Edmund. Vorlesungen über Ethik und Wertlehre (1908-1914), Hua 28. Ed. Ullrich Melle.
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1988.
Husserl, Edmund. Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological
Philosophy, Second Book: Studies in the Phenomenology of Constitution. Trans. Richard
Rokcewicz and André Schuwer. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1989.
Husserl, Edmund. Cartesian Meditations: An Introduction to Phenomenology. Trans. Dorion
Cairns. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoﬀ, 1999.
Husserl, Edmund. Analyses Concerning Passive and Active Synthesis: Lectures on Transcendental
Logic. Trans. Anthony Steinbock. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2001.
Husserl, Edmund. Natur und Geist: Vorlesungen Sommersemester 1927. Dordrecht: Kluwer
Academic Publishers, 2001.
Husserl, Edmund. Zur phänomenologischen Reduktion: Texte aus dem Nachlass (1926-1935). Ed.
Sebastian Luft. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002.
Husserl, Edmund. Einleitung in die Ethik. Vorlesungen Sommersemester 1920 und 1924. Ed.
Henning Peucker. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2004.
Husserl, Edmund. The Basic Problems of Phenomenology. From the Lectures, Winter Semester,
1910-1911. Trans. Ingo Farin and James G. Hart. Dordrecht: Springer, 2006.
Husserl, Edmund. Die Lebenswelt. Auslegungen der Vorgegebenen Welt und Ihrer Konstitution.
Texte aus dem Nachlass (1916-1937). Hua 39. Ed. Rochus Sowa. Dordrecht: Springer, 2008.
Husserl, Edmund. Logical Investigations, Volumes 1 and 2. Trans. J.N. Findlay. Ed. Dermot Moran.
London: Routledge, 2011.
130
M. LAFERTÉ-COUTU

Husserl, Edmund. Einleitung in die Philosophie. Vorlesungen 1916-1920. Ed. Hanne Jacobs.
Dordrecht: Springer, 2012.
Husserl, Edmund. Grenzprobleme der Phänomenologie. Analysen des Unbewusstseins und der
Instinkte. Metaphyics. Späte Ethik. Texte aus dem Nachlass (1908-1937). Hua 42. Eds. Rochus
Sowa and Thomas Vongehr. Dordrecht: Springer, 2014.
Husserl, Edmund. Ideas for a Pure Phenomenology and Phenomenological Philosophy. Trans.
Daniel O. Dahlstrom. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company, 2014.
Husserl, Edmund. First Philosophy. Lectures 1923/1924 and Related Texts from the Manuscripts
(1920-1925). Trans. Sebastian Luft and Thane M. Naberhaus. Dordrecht: Springer, 2019.
Luft, Sebastian. 'Die Konkretion des Ich und das Problem der Ichspaltung in Husserls
phänomenologischer Reduktion'. In Epoché und Reduktion: Formen und Praxis des
Reduktion in der Phänomenologie. eds. Rold Kühn, and Michael Staudigl. Würzburg:
Königshausen & Neumann, 2003.
Luft, Sebastian. 'Husserl's Concept of the 'Transcendental Person': Another Look at the Husserl-
Heidegger Relationship'. International Journal of Philosophical Studies 13, no. 2 (2005): 141-
177.
Luft, Sebastian. 'The Subject as Moral Person. On Husserl's Late Reﬂections Concerning the
Concept of Personhood'. In Investigating Subjectivity: Classical and New Perspectives. eds.
Gert-Jan van der Heiden, Karel Novotný, Inga Römer, and Laszlo Tengelyi. Leiden: Brill, 2012.
Melle, Ullrich. 'The Development of Husserl's Ethics'. Études phénoménologiques (1991): 115-35.
Melle, Ullrich. 'Husserl's Personalist Ethics'. Husserl Studies 23, no. 1 (2007): 1-15.
Shestov, Lev. 'In Memory of a Great Philosopher: Edmund Husserl'. Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research 22, no. 4 (1962): 449-471.
Staiti, Andrea. 'A Grasp From Afar: Überschau and the givenness of life in Husserlian phenom-
enology'. Continental Philosophy Review 46, no. 1 (2013): 21-36.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
131

