Australasian Philosophical Review
ISSN: 2474-0500 (Print) 2474-0519 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rapr20
Rethinking Nature: Phenomenology and a Non-
reductionist Cognitive Science
Shaun Gallagher
To cite this article: Shaun Gallagher (2018) Rethinking Nature: Phenomenology and a
Non-reductionist Cognitive Science, Australasian Philosophical Review, 2:2, 125-137, DOI:
10.1080/24740500.2018.1552074
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/24740500.2018.1552074
Published online: 05 May 2019.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 1021
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 16 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rapr20

LEAD ARTICLE
Rethinking Nature: Phenomenology and a
Non-reductionist Cognitive Science
Shaun Gallaghera,b
aPhilosophy, University of Memphis (USA); bFaculty of Law, Humanities and the Arts,
University of Wollongong, Australia
ABSTRACT
Resistance to the idea that phenomenology can be relevant to cognitive scientific
explanation has faced two objections advanced, respectively, from both sides of the
issue: from the scientific perspective it has been suggested that phenomenology,
understood as an account of first-person experience, is ultimately reducible to cog-
nitive neuroscientific explanation; and from a phenomenological perspective it has
been argued that phenomenology cannot be naturalized. In this context it makes
sense to consider that the notion of scientific reduction is linked to a classic scien-
tific conception of nature. I argue that if properly understood, the proposal to
rethink the concept of nature itself, in enactivist phenomenological approaches,
undermines the reductionist program and redefines what it means for phenomen-
ology to be naturalized.
ARTICLE HISTORY Received 6 October 2016; Revised 25 April 2017
KEYWORDS naturalizing phenomenology; nature; quantum theory; reductionism; science; subjectivity
DX  DP  h/4p
[Heisenberg]1
Bohr complained to Einstein that Heisenberg's approach was too narrow and his gamma-
ray microscope was flawed, although the result was correct. [Cassidy 1992: 9]
 2019 Australasian Association of Philosophy
CONTACT Shaun Gallagher
s.gallagher@memphis.edu
1The equation expresses a version of quantum indeterminacy. Fjelland [2002: 55] explains this equation
as follows:
the product of the uncertainties in two (noncommuting) entities must necessarily exceed a given
constant . . . For example, x can denote the position of a particle, and p its linear momentum. DX is
then the uncertainty in the determination of the position, and DP is the uncertainty in the
determination of the momentum of the same particle. h is Planck's constant. The implications are
radical. For example, if we know the position of a particle exactly, its momentum is totally
unknown, and if we know the momentum exactly, its position is totally unknown.
AUSTRALASIAN PHILOSOPHICAL REVIEW
2018, VOL. 2, NO. 2, 125-137
https://doi.org/10.1080/24740500.2018.1552074

1. Science and Subjectivity
How should we define physical reality? According to Neils Bohr, if we want to give
a 'description of any phenomenon to which the term "physical reality" can be
properly attached' we need to include the
conditions which define the possible types of predictions regarding the future behavior of
the system ... In objective description, it is indeed more appropriate to use the word
phenomenon only to refer to observations obtained under specified circumstances,
including an account of the whole experimental arrangement [Bohr 1935: 148 reprint;
1999: 89].
Bohr was discussing quantum mechanics, but one can take this idea as reflecting
a principle to be applied to science more generally.
Following this line of thought, Ragnar Fjelland [2002: 54] distinguishes between
(1) the classic conception of physical reality or nature, reflected in Descartes or
Galileo's writings, which assumes (a) that a complete description of the world is
deterministic, and (b) 'objectivity means describing reality as it is independently of
man,' namely, in abstract theoretical, and sometimes geometrical or mathematical
terms; and (2) the conception of physical reality held by the working experimen-
tal scientist.
To be sure, the 'classic' conception may be primarily the conception of philoso-
phers rather than the scientists themselves. For the working experimental scientist
the 'basic requirement ... is the reproduceabililty of an experiment by fellow scien-
tists. However, this is only feasible when an adequate description of the experimen-
tal setting is provided' [ibid.: 57].2 In experimental science, the scientist has to say
precisely what she has done in setting up the experiment—she has to include her
own actions. Or as Bohr put it: 'It is a mistake to think that it is the task of physics
to find out how nature is. Physics concerns what we can say about nature' (Bohr,
quoted in Fjelland [ibid.]; emphasis added)3—and that includes what we must say
about our experiments. The conception of nature operationalized by the experi-
mental scientist, as including what the experimenter says and does by way of set-
ting up the experiment, Fjelland argues, accords well with the conception of nature
defended by Bohr and the Copenhagen School of quantum mechanics—according
to which objective physical reality or nature includes the observer.4
As a philosopher who has spent some time in different psychology and neuro-
psychology labs I've always been surprised at the contrast between the well-struc-
tured scientific journal article and the typically not-so-well-structured lab situation,
a contrast that reflects the distinction between theory and practice. The journal art-
icle is neatly organized to rehearse a polished analysis of the data and a reasoned
objective explanation. It specifies in some detail the methods used, although typic-
ally not the details of how the experimenters came to decide on and to implement
2According to a critique developed by Alexandre Koyre [1943: 34], Galileo was more of a theorist than an
experimentalist; Galileo explained 'real being by mathematical being ... bodies moving in straight lines in
infinite empty space are not real bodies moving in real space, but mathematical bodies moving in
mathematical space' (see also Koyre [1939: 3]).
3Bohr [1984: 119] comes close to making physics an empirical phenomenology: 'from our present
standpoint, physics is to be regarded not so much as the study of something a priori given, but rather a
development for methods of ordering and surveying human experience.'
4It also accords well with 'subject naturalism' [Price 2011: 187]—i.e., pragmatic, non-representationalist,
expressivist view where valid claims about nature depend on the status of the subject making those claims.
126
SHAUN GALLAGHER

the methods, what the lab looked like, what other discussions occurred, what the
subjects were really like, whether everyone was fully cooperative (although this is
sometimes mentioned in the case of experiments with infants). We know that in
an experiment much depends on the experimental design and the tools (physical as
well as statistical) that are used to do and to measure what needs to be done and
measured. Specific tools can answer only specific kinds of questions, but not all
questions. A lot also depends on the skills of the scientist. In each case the scientist
using the tools has a degree of proficiency—sometimes high and sometimes low,
but never perfect. Some scientists are really good at designing experiments and
using their tools; but none of them are perfect. Scientific practice is good enough,
and sometimes the best we have, but it is not perfect because the scientist is work-
ing at specific skill levels, and the tools are limited; but also, in the case of the
psychology lab rather than the physics lab, we're studying persons rather than par-
ticles. The subjects involved in the experiment may be more or less tired, more or
less cold, more or less uncomfortable. And as we know, they are frequently young,
white, undergraduates.
Not just in the psychology and neuroscience labs, but in all of the behavioural
and social science labs and contexts, we find subjectivity both in the person of the
experimenter or researcher and in the person (or group of people) under study.
These people, including the researcher, live and work and relate to each other non-
scientifically.5 Scientifically, sometimes, the subject matter under study is precisely
the non-scientific subjectivity of the subject, or a behaviour informed by the sub-
ject's subjectivity. Nonetheless, scientists try to be as objective as possible about the
subjects who are the objects under study; and they use scientific method with the
intention of bracketing out any biases that would come from the researchers' sub-
jective perspectives. As scientists we try to walk away from as much of the subject-
ivity, and our non-scientific life, as we can.
The non-classic conception of nature (as intimated in Bohr), however, includes
subjectivity, and thereby, Fjelland suggests, aligns with phenomenology, and can
benefit from the critical stance that phenomenology developed concerning the nat-
uralism of the natural sciences. Husserl, for example, suggests that science, on the
classic conception, forgets that even the most theoretical considerations are
grounded in the life-world. Science
continues to presuppose this surrounding world as it is given in its particularity to the
scientist. For example, for the physicist it is the world in which he sees his measuring
instruments, hears timebeats, estimates visible magnitudes, etc.—the world in which,
furthermore, he knows himself to be included with all his activity and all his theoretical
ideas [Husserl, cited in Fjelland 2002: 59].
Although the life-world is precisely not the scientific world of particles and
quanta, Husserl and Bohr come close to the same point, which is about the inter-
subjective constitution of nature—the 'what we can say' about nature. For Husserl,
in phenomenology we find the notion of a transcendental intersubjectivity at the
roots of the objectivity of the world [Husserl 1978; see Zahavi 1996]. For Bohr,
5Notwithstanding
claims
by
some
theory
theorists
concerning
our
use
of
folk
psychology
and
theoretical inference.
AUSTRALASIAN PHILOSOPHICAL REVIEW
127

In physics we learn [ ... ] time and again that our task is not to penetrate into the essence
of things, the meaning of which we don't know anyway, but rather to develop concepts
which allow us to talk in a productive way about phenomena in nature. [Bohr, 20 July
1935 cited in Pais 1991: 446].
In some respects, despite the attitude of the experimental scientist who knows
her own lab and, at least implicitly, its relation to the life-world, and who openly
collaborates with other scientists, science in its classic form abstracts away from, or
brackets the elements of subjectivity and intersubjectivity involved in doing science.
As Bohr indicates, one can no longer make that abstraction in physics. Nor can
biology be so neat. Bohr contends that biology is more constrained by the require-
ment that in studying life it needs to keep its subjects alive.
In every experiment on living organisms, there must remain an uncertainty as regards the
physical conditions to which they are subjected, and the idea suggests itself that the
minimal freedom we must allow the organism in this respect is just large enough to permit
it, so to say, to hide its ultimate secrets from us. [Bohr 1999: 34]
Like the quantum in quantum physics, the organism in biology, if not life itself,
appears to be both the starting point and 'the irrational element' from the point of
view of classic naturalism. It's where the partes extra partes conception of
nature fails.
The asserted impossibility of a physical or chemical explanation of the function peculiar to
life would in this sense be analogous to the insufficience of the mechanical analysis for the
understanding of the stability of the atoms. [ibid.]
Thus, according to Bohr, any attempt to reduce biology to physics already faces
problems that are impossible to clean up. This is, perhaps, a rough philosophical
view of science; a more precise philosophy of science would be able to say this bet-
ter and provide an extensive set of examples. The quick point I want to make,
however, returns to the issue of subjectivity; specifically, in sciences that attempt to
understand human behaviour and cognition (psychology, cognitive neuroscience,
economics, and so on). It's not just the subjective constraints found on the side of
the working scientist that are at issue; in addition, the object that is being studied
is not an object per se, but a subject, and, moreover, a subject that does not live in
the scientific (idealized) world, but in the life-world; a subject that does not, in a
primary fashion, treat the world as a world of objects, but rather as a world of
affordances. Indeed, that includes the experimental situation, which typically
involves a set of social affordances. To the extent that the classic behavioural and
cognitive sciences attempt to regard the subject as one object among other objects,
to reduce the embodied agent to a set of computational-neuronal processes that
can be analyzed in terms of physical reality or nature, they not only miss some-
thing important, they frame their explanations in the wrong way. Merleau-Ponty
[1964a: 290] makes this clear:
Science manipulates things and gives up living in them. It makes its own limited models of
things; operating upon these indices or variables to effect whatever transformations are
permitted by their definition, it comes face to face with the real world only at rare
intervals. Science is and always has been that admirably active, ingenious, and bold way of
128
SHAUN GALLAGHER

thinking whose fundamental bias is to treat everything as though it were an object-in-
general—as though it meant nothing to us and yet was predestined for our own use.6
2. Naturalism and Reductionism
The reductionist project is the attempt to treat the world as purely an instance of
objectivity—where nature is understood partes extra partes, as Merleau-Ponty puts
it. The task for reductive science is to get to the most elementary parts (or a theory
of the most elementary parts) of a phenomenon and understand how the latter
gets built up out of (or is translated into) the former. But in the case of cognitive
science we find trouble on both extremes of that sort of reduction. At the very bot-
tom, we find quantum indeterminacy. And at the very top (wherever that is), we
find human behaviour that is not always predictable, and is so complex that it
requires many sciences and non-sciences to study it.
Reduction, understood as intertheoretic reduction [Oppenheim and Putnam
1958; Nagel 1961], where one theory is reduced to a more basic theory, means, in
contemporary science of mind, that psychology and phenomenology reduce to cog-
nitive neuroscience (e.g., Churchland [2002]), or molecular neuroscience (e.g.,
Bickle [2003]). In other words 'facts identified and explained by disciplines operat-
ing at "levels" such as molecular neurobiology or neuroanatomy can explain psy-
chological and phenomenological level facts' [Gerrans 2014: 20]—that is, explain
such facts without significant remainder. For something to count as natural, it
should fit into this kind of reductionist program. Accordingly, 'science can't accept
interpretation as providing knowledge of human affairs if it can't at least in prin-
ciple be absorbed into, perhaps even reduced to, neuroscience' [Rosenberg 2014:
41]. This idea of successful reduction requires, as in any science, the classic concep-
tion of nature, which is an idealization of reality independent of an observer (as
experimenter), or perceiver (as agent or subject being studied). Thus physical real-
ity 'contains only the kinds of things that the hard sciences recognize' [ibid.: 32]. If
nature is not what the classic concept says it is, however, then reduction is in trou-
ble. This is a point made by those who advocate for a radical or enactivist-embod-
ied conception of cognition (e.g., Chemero [2009]; Varela, Thompson and Rosch
[1991]; Thompson [2007]).
Motivation for this view is provided, in part, by Merleau-Ponty's phenomen-
ology. For Merleau-Ponty, as for Bohr, biology is not reducible to chemistry or
physics—nor is psychology reducible to biology:
6Compare with Husserl's [1965: 186] statement:
Mathematical science of nature is a technical marvel for the purpose of accomplishing inductrions
whose fruitfulness, probability, exactitude, and calculability could previously not even be suspected.
As an accomplishment it is a triumph of the human spirit. With regard to the rationality of its
methods and theories, however, it is a thoroughly relative science. It presupposes as data principles
that are themselves thoroughly lacking in actual rationality. In so far as the intuitive environing
world, purely subjective as it is, is forgotten in the scientific thematic, the working subject is also
forgotten, and the scientist is not studied.
Quentin Lauer comments in a translator's footnote to this passage, 'The work of Werner Heisenberg and
Niels Bohr has shown how quantum mechanics and nuclear physics have highlighted precisely the
problem Husserl brings out here.'
AUSTRALASIAN PHILOSOPHICAL REVIEW
129

[L]ife would not be a force which is added to physico-chemical processes; its originality
would be that of modes of connection without equivalent in the physical domain, that of
phenomena gifted with a proper structure and which bind each other together according to
a special dialectic. And it is in this same sense that we have recognized a psychological
order and a mental order. But these distinctions then are those of different regions of
experience. We have been moved from the idea of a nature as omnitudo realitatis to the
idea of objects which could not be conceived in-themselves, partes extra partes, and which
are defined only by an idea in which they participate, by a signification which is realized in
them. [Merleau-Ponty 1964b: 202].
As Merleau-Ponty suggests, citing Bohr, it is not by chance that what holds in
regard to physics also holds in regards to phenomenology.7 The relations that
define the proper structure of phenomena are dynamical ones 'in which the effect
of each partial action is determined by its signification for the whole' [ibid.: 202].
This motivates, for Merleau-Ponty, a transcendental move, since 'the human order
of consciousness does not appear as a third order superimposed on the two others
[matter and life], but as their condition of possibility and their foundation' [ibid.].
Merleau-Ponty's point is not that there is a truth of naturalism understood in
terms of the classic concept of nature; but rather that if we reconceive of nature,
not as a collection of objects or objective relations, but in terms of form (structure,
gestalt), or, as in his later work, 'flesh' [Merleau-Ponty 1968]—where nature is not
independent from the perceiver or the agent—then there is a truth of naturalism
predicated on that kind of nature.
We can see this idea reflected in two basic concepts found in enactivist and rad-
ical embodied cognitive science: the concept of affordance and the concept of situ-
ation. The notion of affordance has its roots in phenomenology. It's Husserl's
notion of 'I can'—the idea that I perceive things in terms of what I can do with
them; or Heidegger's notion of Zuhandenheit—I perceive the world as something
ready-to-hand, something I can work with in a pragmatic way. These ideas are
expressed in Merleau-Ponty's notion of motor intentionality, and in that form
taken up by Gibson, who gives us the fortunate word 'affordance'. Affordances,
then, are relational; they are not objective things located in the environment, but
they show up only in relation to the perceiver's body or skill, and so they necessar-
ily include the perceiver in their definition.
In a similar fashion, John Dewey's notion of situation is not equivalent to the
objective environment. We do not find ourselves in a situation in the way that
something is located in the environment. Rather, like an affordance, the situation is
composed of the subject or agent in relation to the environment. An organism
never exists (and can never exist) apart from some environment; an environment
is what it is only in conjunction with a particular organism that defines it. 'In
actual experience, there is never any such isolated singular object or event; an
object or event is always a special part, phase, or aspect, of an environing experi-
enced world—a situation' [Dewey 1938a: 67]. The situation is constituted by an
organism-environment, which means that the situation already includes the agent
or experiencing subject.
7'Comme le disait Niels Bohr, ce n'est pas un hasard s'il y a harmonie entre les descriptions de la
psychologie (nous dirions: de la phemomenologie) et les conceptions de la physique contemporaine'
[Merleau-Ponty 1995: 373].
130
SHAUN GALLAGHER

The statement that individuals live in a world means, in the concrete, that they live in a
series of situations. The meaning of the word "in" is different from its meaning when it is
said that pennies are "in" a pocket or paint is "in" a can. It means ... that interaction is
going on between individuals and objects and other persons. The conceptions of situation
and of interaction are inseparable from each other. [Dewey 1938b: 43]
Accordingly, both affordance and situation have a relational structure. For the
perceiver-agent, this structure is just the structure of being-in-the-world—a
dynamic coupling between brain-body-environment—which is not reducible to
only brain. Anthony Chemero [2009: 174ff] demonstrates this nicely in an analysis
that shows, in experiments on object exploration, the function of an object is never
just purely the function of an object-in-general; what matters are the affordances
that an object offers to a particular agent. Accordingly, the object is never neutral,
and, within the framework of affordance or situation, behaviour simply cannot be
reduced to differences in brain function alone, ignoring the details of body and
world. If reductionist programs are meant to provide an explanation of cognition
strictly in terms of brain function, without reference to affordances that are defined
by relational properties of body-environment, then in this quarter reductionism
will fail. What's explanatorily relevant is not just the brain, but also the affordance
relation between organism and environment—it's the situation in the strong sense
of situated cognition.
This relational nature, irreducible to either brain or object, is the nature that sci-
ence needs to explain. This concept of nature goes together with the idea that the
phenomena to be explained are irreducible. Rethinking nature and reductionism in
this way, also means we have to rethink science—not just science as it is practiced
by the experimental scientist, but our theoretical conception of science, or science
as we know it.
3. Phenomenology and Embodied Cognitive Science
There continue to be contentious debates over the idea of naturalizing phenomen-
ology, with some philosophers taking up various positions in favour (e.g.,
Gallagher [2012a]; Roy et al. [1999]; Thompson [2007]; Varela [1997]; Zahavi
[2010]), and others who question the idea or are in opposition [Bayne 2004; De
Preester 2002; Lawlor 2009; Pollard 2014]. It's beyond the scope of this paper to
review all of these positions, but I do want to suggest, with some focus on the
reception of Merleau-Ponty's work (see Reynolds [2017] for an excellent review
focused on interpretations of Merleau-Ponty), that most interpreters miss some-
thing
important in
thinking
about
the concept
of naturalization.
I'll
take
Christopher Pollard's very clear and strong argumentation against the project of
naturalization as a good representative.
Pollard [2014] argues that phenomenology, and especially Merleau-Ponty's phe-
nomenology, has been misappropriated in attempts to naturalize phenomenology
and to put it to use in the cognitive sciences. Specifically he refers to theorists who,
in the words of Calvo and Gomila [2008: 7], 'conceive of cognition and behaviour
in terms of the dynamical interaction (coupling) of an embodied system that is
embedded into the surrounding environment,' and he argues that their attempts to
appropriate Merleau-Ponty's embodied phenomenology 'occlude the deeper philo-
sophical significance that he sought to express' [Pollard 2014: 69]. For example,
AUSTRALASIAN PHILOSOPHICAL REVIEW
131

Pollard reads Dreyfus's translation of Merleau-Ponty's notion of the intentional arc
into the cognitive scientific concept of feedback loop, as found in dynamical sys-
tems or connectionist neural networks, as reductionistic. According to Merleau-
Ponty, the intentional arc 'projects round about us our past, our future, our human
setting, our physical, ideological and moral situation, or rather which results in our
being situated in all these respects' [Merleau-Ponty 2002: 157]. That is, Merleau-
Ponty clearly understands the intentional arc to signify something that is irredu-
cible. Dreyfus's
translating the concept 'intentional arc' into the concept 'feedback loop', [is] a move
carried out on the grounds of a deeper translation that takes place without sufficient
argumentation ... This deeper translation consists of 'de-transcendentalizing' Merleau-
Ponty's philosophical position in order to read it as a phenomenological psychology
[Pollard 2014: 73].
Phenomenological psychology, as Pollard points out, 'simply takes its subject
matter "nature" for granted' in terms of categories 'provided by the natural scien-
ces,' that is, by a science that 'address[es] an objective world that it purports to dis-
cover out there wholly independent of human enquirers' [ibid.].
In contrast to Pollard's interpretation, however, the fact that Dreyfus character-
izes the intentional arc as a dynamical relation in terms of the agent's world show-
ing up 'as affordances or solicitations to further action,' suggests that Dreyfus tries
to maintain the irreducible character of the intentional arc, one that would involve
a different conception of nature than the one that science in its classic theoretical
form (or at least in a standard philosophical understanding of science) takes
for granted.
Pollard builds a similar argument against the concept of embodiment found in
Varela et al. [1991], and against my own analysis of body schema [Gallagher
2005a]. He takes issue with Varela et al.'s [1991: xvi] interpretation of Merleau-
Ponty's concept of embodiment as having a double sense: 'for Merleau-Ponty, as
for us, embodiment has this double sense: it encompasses both the body as a lived,
experiential structure and the body as the context [ ... ] of cognitive mechanisms'.
To put this claim in a fuller context, however, the argument by Varela et al. is that
bodies need to be considered both 'as physical structures and as lived, experiential
structures ... in short, as biological and phenomenological' [ibid.: xv] where bio-
logical tends to be the 'context' in which cognitive science speaks of cognitive
mechanisms. Terminology aside, however, and more to the point, the enactivist
account of embodied cognition provided by Varela et al. makes it clear that what
they consider to be cognitive mechanisms grounded in the biological body are pre-
cisely not framed in the classic conception of nature. Rather than replicating a
'subject-object dichotomy,' as Pollard claims, Varela et al. [ibid.: 172-3] propose to
[ ... ] bypass entirely [the] logical geography of inner versus outer by studying cognition
not as recovery or projection but as embodied action ... By using the term embodied we
mean to highlight two points: first, that cognition depends upon the kinds of experience
that come from having a body with various sensorimotor capacities, and second, that these
individual sensorimotor capacities are themselves embedded in a more encompassing
biological, psychological, and cultural context.
Their rejection of representationalism, and their embrace of autopoietic biology,
is in fact a rejection, not only of the cognitivism that tends to dominate cognitive
science, but also of the idea that human subjectivity could be reduced to cognitive
132
SHAUN GALLAGHER

mechanisms that belong to nature as science typically understands it. They make
this explicit in their claim that their
[ ... ] reference point for understanding perception is no longer a pregiven, perceiver-
independent world but rather the sensorimotor structure of the perceiver (the way in
which the nervous system links sensory and motor surfaces) ... Thus the overall concern
of the enactive approach to perception is not to determine how some perceiver-
independent world is to be recovered; it is, rather, to determine the common principles or
lawful linkages between sensory and motor systems that explain how action can be
perceptually guided in a perceiver-dependent world. [ibid.: 173].
Moreover, it is precisely at this point that they provide a long quote from
Merleau-Ponty's [1964b] Structure of Behavior, a passage that states precisely what
Dewey had stated in his famous essay on The Reflex-Arc Concept in Psychology
[Dewey 1896]: namely, that it is not a subject-independent environment that
defines what counts as a stimulus for the organism, but 'the organism itself—
according to the proper nature of its receptors, the thresholds of its nerve centres
and the movements of the organs [i.e., the cognitive mechanisms]—which chooses
the stimuli in the physical world to which it will be sensitive' [Merleau-Ponty
quoted in Varela et al. 1991: 174].
Pollard, likewise, takes my characterization of the body schema to be reduction-
istic to the extent that by equating it with motor programs I would deny the holis-
tic character the body schema is meant to express, specifically as an expression of
the way that the perceiver is in-the-world. Yet my characterization is in fact an
attempt to avoid any kind of reduction of body schema to a neural representation,
as is often found in neuroscientific accounts (e.g., Berlucchi and Aglioti [2010]; see
Gallagher [2012b]). Pollard quotes my characterization in this regard:
[The body schema] is more complex than it first might seem. Not only are the anatomical
parts of hand and face involved, but also a large number of muscle systems throughout the
body are activated for purposes of maintaining balance. One might refer to this entire
complex organization of movement as 'a body schema', and consider that a subject is
capable of many such complex patterns. [Gallagher 2005a: 24].
The body schema is not described, here, in 'atomistic' terms or as 'an aggregate,'
as Pollard suggests, but indeed in a holistic way (specifically in contrast to the
body image that is experienced in an articulated fashion).8 It's not an addition of
atomistic or autonomous programs, but a dynamical structure that tends to involve
the whole body in its relation to the environment (see Gallagher [1986; 2005b;
2011]), just as Merleau-Ponty describes it.
In each of these cases, I would argue, the terms 'intentional arc', 'embodiment',
and 'body schema', like the terms 'affordance' and 'situation', are used in a way
that disrupts the conception of nature as something that science takes for granted,
and tries to get at a different conception of nature—a conception of nature that
allows for irreducible structures. What Pollard, and many who oppose naturalizing
phenomenology miss is similar to what Pollard claims is missed by those who
would naturalize phenomenology—the 'deeper philosophical significance' of that
naturalization, namely the different concepts of nature and naturalism at stake;
8Pollard may have been misled by my report on the use of the plural term 'body schemas' as 'a collection
of motor programs' (Gallagher 2005a: 24)—this, however, was intended as a report on the use of the plural
term in the psychological literature.
AUSTRALASIAN PHILOSOPHICAL REVIEW
133

concepts that Merleau-Ponty [1964b: 201ff] inspired by his claim that there is a
'truth of naturalism'.
Pollard may be correct in his characterization of a naturalized phenomenology
as de-transcendentalized;9 but whether that claim is correct or not, it does not
mean that it is simply appropriated by a natural science that remains tied to the
classic scientific conception of nature. In a paper I wrote with Francisco Varela
[Gallagher and Varela 2003], we suggested that when phenomenology and cognitive
science mutually enlighten each other in the right way, both phenomenology and
cognitive science are transformed. To the extent that such an approach emphasizes
non-linear dynamical systems and self-organizing emergence,
it further insists that cognition is best characterized as belonging to embodied, situated
agents—agents who are in-the-world. On this understanding of the cognitive sciences ...
phenomenologists and philosophers of mind work together with the empirical scientists in
order to develop a fuller and more holistic view of cognitive life—a life that is not just the
life of the mind, but of an embodied, ecologically situated, and enactive agent
...
Everything, however, depends on what one means by naturalization [ibid.: 19].
What one means by naturalization directly depends on what one means by
nature. In this respect, a reductionistic program is possible only on an understand-
ing of nature as a partes extra partes objective totality, which, along with Merleau-
Ponty, we should reject; in contrast, the enactive-phenomenological and the eco-
logical-pragmatic idea of an affordance-based conception of nature as relative to
situated perceiving agents rules out a reductionist strategy in principle.
4. Conclusion: A Meta-Copernican Turn?
The idea of rethinking the concept of nature, and therefore the notions of natural-
ism and naturalizing, is not equivalent to a paradigm change, as one might think
of the turn from the Ptolemaic universe to the Copernican one, or from
Newtonian physics to Einsteinian relativity. Such paradigm changes tend to retain
the classic scientific conception of nature. That is, it tends to be science as usual,
even if it's revolutionary science, as Kuhn [2012] defined it. On the one hand, in
philosophy, a transcendental turn may be considered a Copernican revolution, as
Kant famously suggested. It may be so even if in fact the transcendental project is
to provide firm foundations that legitimize scientific knowledge, as we know it. On
the other hand, a rethinking of the concept of nature itself, that is, a thinking that
takes nature not as objective physical reality, not as a totality of objects, or par-
ticles, but as relational, situational, involving/including, irreducibly, agents who per-
ceive and respond to affordances in the modal attitude of the 'I can', would
necessarily be a rethinking of the nature of science. In that sense would it not be a
meta-Copernican turn? Quantum physics seems to push towards the edges of that
notion. Husserl's project, too, to the extent that it involves showing the intersub-
jective ground of objectivity [Husserl 1978; Zahavi 1996], fits the job description of
a philosophical meta-Copernican revolution. What's not clear, and what therefore
remains a question, is whether this kind of rethinking would leave the practice of
9But see Zahavi [2010: 16]: 'a naturalization of phenomenology might not only entail a radical modification
(rather than abandonment) of transcendental philosophy, but also a rethinking of the concept of nature—a
rethinking that might ultimately lead to a transformation of natural science itself'.'
134
SHAUN GALLAGHER

science, as we know it, in place, as is, or not. If, at the very least, it would redefine
science as a non-reductionist project, would it entail doing science differently?
Would scientific practice need to change in order to focus our scientific experi-
ments more on holistic relations (brain-body-environment) than on just brains?
(see Gallagher [2017]). Merleau-Ponty's [1964a] final critical remarks suggest a
positive answer to this question.
Constructive
scientific
activities
see
themselves
and
represent
themselves
to
be
autonomous, and their thinking deliberately reduces itself to a set of data-collecting
techniques which it has invented. To think is thus to test out, to operate, to transform—on
the condition that this activity is regulated by an experimental control that admits only the
most "worked-out" phenomena, more likely produced by the apparatus than recorded by
it. From this state of affairs arise all sorts of vagabond endeavors. [ibid.: 291]
What are the alternatives to scientific reductionism? Acknowledging antinomies
(e.g., Kant's atomism vs holism)? Or complementarity (e.g., Bohr's wave-particle
dualism)? Or a postmodern pluralism (e.g., Lyotard's [1988] paralogy)? Or an
insistence on the primacy of the life-world (Husserl, Fjelland)? Or is the rethinking
of nature, as Merleau-Ponty intended, an insistence on a dynamical, multidimen-
sional existence that requires a multidisciplinary approach that necessarily dis-
counts every single discipline for the sake of the many; where neither neuroscience,
nor psychology, nor phenomenology, nor anthropology, nor economics, nor any
one of the cognitive arts and sciences gets the final say10 because existence is never
just one thing?
Acknowledgements
Thanks to Jack Reynolds and Dan Zahavi for comments on earlier drafts.
Disclosure Statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.
Funding
Thanks
to
the
Humboldt
Foundation
Anneliese
Maier
Research
Award
for
supporting
this research.
ORCID
Shaun Gallagher
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-3147-9929
References
Bayne, T. 2004. Closing the Gap? Some Questions for Neurophenomenology, Phenomenology and
the Cognitive Sciences 3/4: 349-364.
10I've indicated elsewhere that this type of non-reductionistic cognitive science aligns with Sandra Mitchell's
[2002] concept of integrative pluralism. See also Gallagher et al. [2015]; and McGivern [2008].
AUSTRALASIAN PHILOSOPHICAL REVIEW
135

Berlucchi, G. and S. M. Aglioti 2010. The Body in the Brain Revisited, Experimental Brain
Research 200/1: 25-35.
Bickle, J. 2003. Philosophy and the Neurosciences: A Ruthlessly Reductionist Account, Dordrecht:
Kluwer Academic.
Bohr, N. 1935. Can Quantum-mechanical Dscription of Physical Reality be Considered Complete?
Physical Review 481: 696-702; reprinted in Quantum Theory and Measurement, eds J. A.
Wheeler and W. H. Zurek, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2014: 145-152.
Bohr, N. 1984. Collected Works vol. 5, ed. K. Stolzenburg, Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Bohr, N. 1999. Collected Works vol. 10, eds F. Aaserud and D. Favrholdt, Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Calvo, P. and T. Gomila, eds, 2008. Handbook of Cognitive Science: An Embodied Approach,
Oxford: Elsevier.
Cassidy, D. 1992. Uncertainty: The Life and Science of Werner Heisenberg, New York: W.H.
Freeman. Cited at https://www.aip.org/history/exhibits/heisenberg/p09.htm.
Chemero, A. 2009. Radical Embodied Cognitive Science, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Churchland, P. S. 2002. Brain-Wise, Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press.
De Preester, H. 2002. Naturalizing Husserlian Phenomenology: An Introduction, Psychoanalytische
Perspectieven 20/4: 633-47.
Dewey, J. 1896. The Reflex Arc Concept in Psychology, Psychological Review 3: 357-70.
Dewey, J. 1938a. Logic: The Theory of Inquiry, New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Dewey, J. 1938b. Experience and Education, New York: Macmillan.
Fjelland, R. 2002. The 'Copenhagen Interpretation' of Quantum Mechanics and Phenomenology,
in Hermeneutic Philosophy of Science: Van Gogh's Eyes and God, ed. B. E. Babich, Dordrecht:
Kluwer: 53-66.
Gallagher, S. 1986. Lived Body and Environment, Research in Phenomenology 16: 139-70.
Gallagher, S. 2005a. How the Body Shapes the Mind, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gallagher, S. 2005b. Dynamic Models of Body Schematic Processes, in Body Image and Body
Schema, eds H. De Preester and V. Knockaert, Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishers:
233-50.
Gallagher, S. 2011. Time in Action, in Oxford Handbook on Time, ed. C. Callender, Oxford:
Oxford University Press: 419-37.
Gallagher, S. 2012a. On the Possibility of Naturalizing Phenomenology, in Oxford Handbook of
Contemporary Phenomenology, ed. D. Zahavi, Oxford: Oxford University Press: 70-93.
Gallagher, S. 2012b. Why the Body is Not in the Brain, in Bodies in Action & Symbolic Forms.
Zwei Seiten der Verk€orperungstheorie, eds M. Lauschke, H. Bredekamp and A. Arteaga, Berlin:
Academie Verlag: 273-88.
Gallagher, S. 2017. Enactivist Interventions: Rethinking the Mind, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gallagher,
S.,
L.
Reinerman-Jones,
B.
Janz,
P.
Bockelman,
and
J.
Trempler
2015.
The
Neurophenomenology of Awe and Wonder, London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Gallagher, S. and F. Varela, F. 2003. Redrawing the Map and Resetting the Time: Phenomenology
and the Cognitive Sciences, Canadian Journal of Philosophy. Supplementary 29: 93-132.
Gerrans, P. 2014. The Measure of Madness, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Husserl, E. 1978. Zur Ph€anomenologie der Intersubjektivit€at: Texte aus dem Nachlass Vol. 3, Haag:
Martinus Nijhoff.
Husserl, E. 1965. Phenomenology and the Crisis of Philosophy, trans. Q. Lauer, New York: Harper
Torchbooks.
Koyre, A. 1943. Galileo and Plato, in Metaphysics and Measurement, ed. A. Koyre, Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1968.
Koyre, A. 1939. Galileo Studies, London: Harvester, 1978.
Kuhn, T. S. 2012. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lawlor, L. 2009. Becoming and Auto-Affection (Part II): Who are We? Invited Lecture, ICNAP,
http://www.icnap.org/meetings.htm (accessed 15 January 2011)
Lyotard J-F. 1988. The Postmodern Condition, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
McGivern, P. 2008. Reductive Levels and Multi-scale Structure. Synthese 165/1: 53-75.
Merleau-Ponty, M. 1964a. The Primacy of Perception, trans. J. M. Edie, Evanston: Northwestern
University Press.
Merleau-Ponty, M. 1964b. The Structure of Behavior, trans. A. Fisher, Boston: Beacon.
136
SHAUN GALLAGHER

Merleau-Ponty, M. 1968. The Visible and the Invisible, trans. A. Lingis, Evanston: Northwestern
University Press.
Merleau-Ponty, M. 1995. La Nature: notes cours du college de france. Paris: Edition du Seuil.
Merleau-Ponty, M. 2002. Phenomenology of Perception. London: Routledge.
Mitchell, S. D. 2002. Integrative Pluralism, Biology and Philosophy 17/1: 55-70.
Nagel, E. 1961. The Structure of Science: Problems in the Logic of Scientific Explanation, New
York: Harcourt, Brace, and World.
Oppenheim, P. and H. H. Putnam 1958. Unity of Science as a Working Hypothesis, Minnesota
Studies in the Philosophy of Science 2: 3-36.
Pais, A. 1991. Niels Bohr's Times: In Physics, Philosophy, and Polity. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Pollard, C. 2014. Merleau-Ponty and Embodied Cognitive Science, Discipline Filosofiche 24/2:
67-90.
Price, H. 2011. Naturalism without Mirrors. Oxford; Oxford University Press.
Reynolds, J. 2017. Merleau-Ponty's Gordian Knot: Transcendental Phenomenology, Science, and
Naturalism, Continental Philosophy Review, 50(1): 81-104.
Rosenberg, A. 2014. Why I am a Naturalist, in Philosophical Methodology: The Armchair or the
Laboratory?, ed. M.C. Haug, London: Routledge.
Roy, J.-M., J. Petitot, B. Pachoud, and F. J. Varela 1999. Beyond the Gap: An Introduction to
Naturalizing
Phenomenology,
in
Naturalizing
Phenomenology:
Issues
in
Contemporary
Phenomenology and Cognitive Science, eds J. Petitot, F. J. Varela, B. Pachoud, and J.-M. Roy,
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press: 1-80.
Thompson, E. 2007. Mind in Life, Cambridge, MA.: Harvard University Press.
Varela, F. J. 1997. The Naturalization of Phenomenology as the Transcendence of Nature:
Searching for Generative Mutual Constraints, Alter: revue de phenomenologie 5: 355-85.
Varela, F., E. Thompson, and E. Rosch. 1991. The Embodied Mind, Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press.
Zahavi, D. 1996. Husserl's Intersubjective Transformation of Transcendental Philosophy, Journal
of the British Society for Phenomenology 27/7: 228-45.
Zahavi, D. 2010. Naturalized Phenomenology, in Handbook of Phenomenology and Cognitive
Science, eds S. Gallagher and D. Schmicking, Dordrecht: Springer: 1-19.
AUSTRALASIAN PHILOSOPHICAL REVIEW
137

