Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology
ISSN: 0007-1773 (Print) 2332-0486 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rbsp20
Edmund Husserl's Phenomenology of Habituality
and Habitus
Dermot Moran
To cite this article: Dermot Moran (2011) Edmund Husserl's Phenomenology of Habituality
and Habitus, Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology, 42:1, 53-77, DOI:
10.1080/00071773.2011.11006731
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00071773.2011.11006731
Published online: 21 Oct 2014.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 1230
View related articles 
Citing articles: 16 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rbsp20

Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology, Vol. 42, No. 1, January 2011
EDMUND HUSSERL'S PHENOMENOLOGY OF
HABITUALITY AND HABITUS
DERMOT MORAN
Introduction
The concept of habit enfolds an enormous richness and diversity of
meanings. According to Husserl, habit, along with association, memory, and so
on, belongs to the very essence of the psychic.1 Husserl even speaks of an
overall genetic "phenomenology of habitualities".2 In this paper, as an initial
attempt to explicate the complexity of phenomenological treatments of habit, I
want to trace Husserl's conception of habit, as it emerged in his mature genetic
phenomenology, in order to highlight his enormous and neglected original
contribution in this area. I shall show that Husserl was by no means limited to
a Cartesian intellectualist explication of habitual action (as commentators such
as Bourdieu and Dreyfus have claimed), but attempted to characterize its
complexity across the range of human individual, sub-personal, personal, social
and collective experience. Habit, as we shall see, for Husserl, is intimately
involved in the constitution of meaningfulness (Husserl's Sinnhaftigkeit) and
forms of sense (Sinnesgestalten) at all levels, from the level of perceptual
experience, through the formation of the ego, to the development of society,
history and tradition, indeed to our whole sense of the harmonious course of
worldly life, including the genetic constitution of worldhood as such.
Habituality, furthermore, is a key structural principle in the genetic constitution
of the transcendental ego itself, as it unfolds as a concrete living and acting
person in an intersubjective, cultural and historical world.
Habit in the Contemporary Human Sciences: A Short Survey
The concept of habit (Greek hexis; Latin habitus)3 has long been recognized
by philosophers as playing a central role in human intentional practical activity,
in the acquisition and solidification of practical knowledge, and in the formation
of character and selfhood. Plato, in his Theaetetus (197a-b), invoking the image
of captive birds in an aviary, discusses latent knowledge as a kind of 'having'
(epistemes heksin) or 'possessing' (epistemes ktesin) at one's disposal; and
Aristotle, especially in his Nicomachean Ethics Book Two 1106b, considers
disposition or habit (hexis, ethos) to be a key feature of moral action; habitual
performing of good actions literally builds 'character'.4 In the eighteenth
century, habit was again a matter of discussion among the Scottish moralists
(e.g. Hutcheson). In his Enquiry concerning Human Understanding (1748), for
instance, David Hume argues that "Custom or Habit" is a basic "principle of
human nature" that allows us to infer causal relations between events, where we
53

perceive only contiguity, succession, constant conjunction, and so on.5 Hume
writes:
Custom, then, is the great guide of human life. It is that principle alone which renders our
experience useful to us, and makes us expect, for the future, a similar train of events with those
which have appeared in the past. Without the influence of custom, we should be entirely ignorant
of every matter of fact beyond what is immediately present to the memory and senses. We
should never know how to adjust means to ends, or to employ our natural powers in the
production of any effect. There would be an end at once of all action, as well as of the chief part
of speculation.6
Hume then gives habit an extended role beyond the subject in that it is involved
in the constitution of the world as meaningful (something which Husserl
particularly applauds in his reading of Hume).
Habit was also a matter of interest to the nineteenth-century psychologists,
including William James,7 for whom "habit is the enormous fly-wheel of
society, its most precious conservative agent".8 Twentieth-century Anglophone
philosophy has discussed habit under the title of 'knowing how', which Gilbert
Ryle, for instance, presented as a kind of ability, a complex of dispositions.9
Others such as Polanyi or Fodor have preferred to speak in terms of 'tacit
knowledge',10 whereas Bertrand Russell and others have spoken of 'knowledge
by acquaintance'. Unfortunately, standard accounts of habit in philosophy have
traditionally ignored the contribution of Edmund Husserl.11
Habit became an important and recurrent theme in twentieth-century
sociology from Max Weber to Pierre Bourdieu.12 Bourdieu13 has discussed what
he calls 'habitus' in a number of studies, characterizing it as a set of "systems
of durable transposable dispositions, structured structures predisposed to
function as structuring structures... principles that organize and generate
practices and representation",14 an "acquired system of generative schemes".
Bourdieu sees habitus as an overlooked structuring principle or force, which
generates objectively real social distinctions not through deliberate intervention
of agents, but through a kind of dispersal. One can think, for instance, of the
classifications that have appeared in record shops such that broad
differentiations such as 'rock', 'folk' and so on have been progressively
differentiated into 'heavy metal', 'classic rock', 'folk-rock', 'indie', 'world
music' and so on. Bourdieu, however,  has been criticized for over-emphasizing
the objectivist side and underplaying the role of individual agency in the
adoption and promulgation of habits.
In fact, Bourdieu does explicitly acknowledge his debt to Husserl,15 along
with the contributions of Alfred Schütz, Max Weber, Marcel Mauss,16 Lévi-
Strauss, and Norbert Elias (who discussed psychic and social habitus in the
evolution of European manners17). In a 2001 reply to critics, Bourdieu claims
that his "aim [is] to integrate phenomenological analysis into a global approach
of which it is one phase (the first, subjective phase), the second being the
objectivist analysis."18 He is critical of Husserl for locating habitus within the
54

domain of conscious subjectivity and for failing to give habit the status of
practical knowledge.19 More generally, Bourdieu believes that phenomenology
offers at best a "complicitous description" of the life-world, i.e. a description of
surface features that does not uncover the underlying structures and forces at
work. Thus he writes that the
...prerequisite for a science of commonsense representations which seeks to be more than a
complicitous description is a science of the structures which govern both practices and the
concomitant representations, the latter being the principal obstacle to the constitution of such a
science.20
Habit, finally, has resurfaced as a matter of intense interest and debate in the
philosophy of action and of the cognitive sciences, where it is often linked with a
kind of skilful coping that does not need explicit conscious representation.21 Hubert
L. Dreyfus, for instance, draws liberally on Merleau-Ponty's phenomenology of
motor intentionality and Heidegger's analysis of everyday being-in-the-world to
articulate a conception of everyday expertise, which prioritizes bodily response
and claims to avoid a Cartesian intellectualist and representationalist construal.22
Dreyfus has been drawn into a debate with John McDowell on precisely the
amount of conceptuality, deliberation and "responsiveness to reasons" involved in
this everyday 'coping', or what Aristotle and McDowell call 'practical intelligence'
or 'practical wisdom' (phronesis).23 Both agree that habitus involves a certain
degree of generalization (that its practicality and conceptuality is situation-
specific), but they disagree about the amount of intelligent purposiveness and
awareness involved. Dreyfus argues that, for an expert practitioner, the action must
be a form of absorbed coping (where no degree of self-aware ego is prominent),
whereas McDowell insists on practice being permeated by a degree of self-
awareness. Much depends on the conception of egoic involvement at stake here,
and this is one of the issues that Husserl has carefully addressed in his analyses.
He maintains, for instance, that self-reflection presupposes an unreflected
consciousness.24 Unfortunately, neither McDowell nor Dreyfus specifically
addresses Husserl's contribution in their debate with each other.25
Disambiguating Different Conceptions of Habit
Given our brief survey of recent theoretical approaches, it is evident that
there is a pressing need for philosophers of mind and action to describe carefully
and to distinguish between various kinds of habitual and routine behaviour:
between instinctive and reflex reaction, natural corporeal tendency or
mannerism, learned and incorporated skill, expert practice, and so on. Habits
may be, on the one hand, individual, corporeal, perceptual, and personal, or, on
the other hand, social, cultural, collective, historical and traditional. Habits can
be good (e.g. daily exercise) or bad (e.g. smoking); there is a historical evolution
of habits (e.g. eating habits), and there is a great fixity and resistance to change
so that habits may be said to be intensely conservative.
55

Habit is intimately connected with disposition, the exercise of a skill, the
carrying out of routines, and the embodiment of activities such as typing,
playing music, dancing, driving, reading and so on, but it is also connected with
knowledge, expertise, moral practical wisdom and character. Some
commentators, for instance, want to distinguish between habits, properly
speaking, which have a degree of purposive intentionality, and other kinds of
more 'automatic' or 'mechanical' behaviour. At least one commentator regards
addictions (e.g. alcoholism), compulsions (e.g. obsessive compulsive disorders)
and phobias (e.g. claustrophobia) as automatic behaviour rather than habitual
action, but the grounds for this classification are somewhat obscure.26 Perhaps
the most focus, as illustrated by the Dreyfus-McDowell debate, has been on
whether habitual action requires conscious deliberation and to what extent it is
illuminated by recourse to reasons or even some kind of self-awareness.
Dreyfus, for instance, quotes Sartre's famous description of running after a
streetcar, when, preoccupied with running and catching the vehicle, there is no
ego at play in the activity.27 These debates show that careful conceptual
differentiation is required; right now, the terminology is fluid and the concepts
involved are not carefully delineated. But I believe this ought to be carried out
on the basis of a highly nuanced and highly self-reflective transcendental
phenomenology of habitual action, and the current proposals and differentiations
are simply not convincing because they are not grounded in attentive
phenomenological description (with attendant exclusion of pre-judgement
through the practice of the epoché).
A thorough-going phenomenological account of habit has to acknowledge
the different roles played by habit at the individual and the collective levels.
From the standpoint of the individual, there is a corporeal or bodily habitus and
indeed that is the primary meaning of the term in a medical context (referring
to a person's overall 'bearing', 'form', how they physically present themselves
(Husserl does invoke that notion of habitus, for instance when he criticizes
Theodor Lipps' understanding of human bodily expressions and talks about
expression as a 'bodily habitus'28). Memories, skills, and practical abilities are
literally incorporated in the body, in the way we hold ourselves, move our
bodies, walk, sit, eat, look weary, adopt a defeated air, and so on.29 Some people
have a more or less 'innate', 'natural' or 'given' sense of balance, an ability to
feel their way through water when swimming, a joy in hearing sounds; Husserl
speaks of this as belonging to sheer facticity.30 Such natural senses
(proprioceptive, perceptive and other) can of course be isolated and indeed fine-
tuned (balance can be tuned by visualization techniques, for instance). Training
can build on and amplify these natural abilities and capacities. For Edith Stein,
for instance, capacities can be strengthened through "habituation".31
Habit has to be located between reflexive behaviour and intellectually self-
conscious deliberate action. It is not to be understood as something merely
56

mechanical or automatic, a matter of sheer mindless reflex or repetition. Nor,
as Merleau-Ponty points out, is habit a matter of intellectual knowledge, an
outcome of explicit deliberation or informed by the representation of reasons or
ends. Rather it is a kind of embodied praxis that is actually extremely
individualized. Each individual has his or her own 'style'.32 That is not to say
that habit has nothing to do with rational deliberation and intellectual scrutiny.
There are intellectual habits - 'bedding down' or 'burning in' good practices
and procedures, e.g. reading a poem every day, learning a new French word,
performing the phenomenological epoché, and so on. Developing or changing
a habit, moreover, may require deliberation and scrutiny. Giving up or resisting
a habit, e.g. smoking, requires the development of new habits, new overriding
and deflective routines. It also requires a certain second-order stance towards
my first-order instincts: I desire to smoke; I desire to stop smoking; I desire to
curb my desire to smoke. Indeed, almost one hundred years ago, Husserl
specified these lower and higher order relationships involving habits. In Ideas
II he writes:
the personal Ego constitutes itself not only as a person determined by drives...but also as a
higher, autonomous, freely acting Ego, in particular one guided by rational motives... Habits
are necessarily formed, just as much with regard to originally instinctive behaviour...as with
regard to free behaviour. To yield to a drive establishes the drive to yield: habitually. Likewise,
to let oneself be determined by a value-motive and to resist a drive establishes a tendency (a
"drive") to let oneself be determined once again by such a value-motive...and to resist these
drives.33
Merleau-Ponty and Schütz on Habit and Habituality
The discussion of habit in the broad phenomenological tradition is usually
associated with Scheler, Heidegger, Schütz and Merleau-Ponty, rather than
Husserl. Among phenomenologists, however, Husserl offers the most detailed
discussions of habit and lays the basis for the further interpretations of Merleau-
Ponty and Schütz. Despite the importance of Merleau-Ponty's analysis of
'motor habit' in Dreyfus' account of skilful coping, the term 'habit' is not
particularly prominent in Merleau-Ponty's Phenomenology of Perception
(1945).34 Indeed there are only a handful of occurrences of the term 'habitus',
although Merleau-Ponty does discuss the "habitual body" (corps habituel),35
with its "body-image" (schéma corporel). According to Merleau-Ponty, habitus
has to do primarily with bodily or corporeal insertion in the world (mon
insertion dans le monde humain).36 In discussing the case of the phantom limb
he distinguishes between the "customary or habitual body" and the "body at
present":
In the case under consideration, the ambiguity of knowledge amounts to this: our body
comprises as it were two distinct layers, that of the habit-body and that of the body at this
moment. In the first appear manipulatory movements which have disappeared from the second,
and the problem how I can have the sensation of still possessing a limb which I no longer have
amounts to finding out how the habitual body can act as guarantee for the body at this moment.37
57

Merleau-Ponty is keen to argue against habit as involving an initial mental act
of recognition or the performance of an intellectual synthesis. Rather, "the
cultivation of habit is indeed the grasping of a significance, but it is a motor
grasping of a motor significance."38 Here he offers the examples of walking
through a doorway without first measuring if one can fit through it, or driving
my car through a narrow opening and knowing intuitively that my car will fit
through. We essentially incorporate ourselves in the car, into the door, which
are not encountered as external objects but rather as instruments expressing my
abilities. As Merleau-Ponty summarizes: "Habit expresses our power of dilating
our being in the world, or changing our existence by appropriate fleshly
instruments."39
Habit, for Merleau-Ponty, is embodied as a certain kind of capacity for
motility (as in the case of the fingers and hands 'knowing' where to move when
typing), an opening up of a motor space: "it is the body which 'understands' in
the cultivation of habit"; there is a "harmony" between what is intended and its
fulfilment, "between the intention and its performance—and the body is our
anchor in a world."40 The body mediates the world; it constitutes motility,41
indeed in the end the body knows better than us about the world:
The person who perceives is not spread out before himself as a consciousness must be; he has
historical density, he takes up a perceptual tradition and is faced with a present. In perception
we do not think the object and we do not think ourselves thinking it, we are given over to the
object and we merge into this body which is better informed than we are about the world.42
A good decade before Merleau-Ponty, the phenomenological sociologist
Alfred Schütz in The Phenomenology of the Social World (1932)43 - again
drawing on Husserl's discussion of 'types' - closely associates the notions of
habit, habituality, and 'familiarity' with typification, according to which our
experience is organized around identifiable empirical types, such as 'dog',
'tree' and so on, that come about through association.44 Schütz later
collaborated with the sociologist Thomas Luckmann to offer an extended
account of "habitual knowledge" in The Structures of the Life-World (1973).45
For instance, one lives in one's native language in a completely familiar,
habitual way; speaking other languages may involve degrees of familiarity.
Daily life, for Schütz, consists of mastery of typical, recurrent situations. I
meet a dog on the street, and even if its particular breed is unfamiliar, I
recognize it as belonging to the 'type' dog.46
Following Husserl, Max Scheler in his Formalism in Ethics and the Non-
Formal Ethics of Values (1913), published in Husserl's Yearbook, also
emphasizes habitus in terms both of bodily and of social incorporation. He
instances the case of the national Chauvinist who in each country has the same
gestures, the same statements, the same opinions.47 Bourdieu has similarly
analyzed the 'habitus' of life-styles associated with different social classes,
groups of scientists, and so on.48
58

These phenomenologists (especially Schütz, Stein and Scheler) were
developing ideas which were in discussion in Husserl's circle and on which
Husserl was writing in his private research manuscripts, many of which also
circulated in typescript. Let us turn now to a deeper exploration of Husserl's
analyses of habitual action and comportment (Verhalten), but first a word
concerning his technical vocabulary.
A Note on Husserl's Terminology
Habit is one of Husserl's "operative concepts", an appellation his student
Eugen Fink invented to label concepts Husserl routinely employs rather than
makes explicitly thematic.49 Indeed, as we shall see below, habit is discussed
only infrequently in the works Husserl published during his life-time. He
routinely employs a wide range of terms to express his concept of habit, namely,
Gewohnheit,50 Habitus,51 Habitualität and, occasionally, 'the habitual' (das
Habituelle) as a noun.52 Occasionally he even uses the Greek hexis, and he often
speaks quite generally of 'possession' (Besitz), or 'having' (Habe) of a skill, a
routine, or a decision, that has been incorporated and embedded as a trait in
one's character.53
Most frequently, adjectives meaning 'habitual'
(gewohnheitsmässig, habituel) are employed to qualify different kinds of
intentional behaviour.
In German, as in English, the term 'Habitus' can have a quite specific
medical meaning to refer to the overall bodily condition, including physique
and posture, the way the lived body presents itself, disposition.54 Husserl also
uses 'Habitus' to express the concept of 'demeanour', 'comportment',
'bearing', 'manner' in so far as this is individually formed through routine
actions, sedimented beliefs, personal style, and so on. In this sense, 'Habitus'
refers to something with a degree of stability and permanence - "abiding habit"
(bleibender Habitus).55
Generally speaking, Husserl employs the normal German term for 'habit'
(Gewohnheit) to refer specifically to habits of thought, ways of thinking
influenced by science, psychology and so on.56 Thus, for example, in Ideas I
(1913)57 Husserl speaks of psychological and psychologistic deeply entrenched
"habits of thought" (Denkgewohnheiten),58 including scientific habits of
thinking which are accepted without question and which it is the function of the
epoché to disrupt.59
Husserl often speaks of 'Habitualitäten' - dispositions, in the plural. He
frequently refers to a person's "abilities and dispositions" (Vermögen und
Habitualitäten): in his Phenomenological Psychology lectures (1925)60 he
speaks of the personal ego as having various abilities and habitualities.61
Similarly, in his 1927 Encyclopaedia Britannica entry on 'Phenomenology' he
talks about Habitus in terms of "abilities and habit" (Vermögen und Habitus).62
Habituality in this sense is usually combined with human personal abilities and
59

activities to form what Husserl calls an "overall personal style". Husserl
sometimes uses the word 'dispositions' (Dispositionen) alongside the notion of
'abilities' (Vermögen), and 'habits' (Gewohnheiten).63
Habit in the Works Husserl Published During his Life
As we have noted, habit is not encountered frequently in the works Husserl
published in his life-time (Logical Investigations, Ideas I, Cartesian
Meditations and Crisis of European Sciences). Thus, for instance, the term
Habitus does not appear at all in the Crisis of European Sciences; Gewohnheit
has only a few occurrences there; and Habitualität probably appears at most
about a dozen times. Similarly, the term Habitus appears only twice in the
Cartesian Meditations where Habitualität is more common.64 Indeed, Husserl's
readers initially encountered the concept of 'habit' and 'habituality' primarily
through the few references in the Cartesian Meditations (especially sections 27
and 32) and Experience and Judgment. Section 32 of Cartesian Meditations is
entitled 'The Ego as Substrate of Habitualities' (Das Ich als Substrat von
Habitualitäten),65 and this section is drawn on by Bourdieu, for instance. Here
Husserl primarily talks about the manner in which a conscious decision (a freely
performed act of judging, e.g. 'I decide to vote for the Green Party') can become
sedimented down into a habitual property attaching to one's character (I become
a Green Party voter) such that the original decision can even be forgotten. This
may have given rise to the impression that Husserl primarily understands
habitus as functioning in an individual ego and in intellectualist action (as in the
sedimentation of active judgments into dispositions). However, habituality as
encountered in Husserl's posthumously published Experience and Judgment
(1938) suggests a rather different picture.66 This text appeared just after
Husserl's death, edited by his former assistant Ludwig Landgrebe, who—with
the master's encouragement—selected liberally from among Husserl's
unpublished manuscripts. In this account, there is a much closer focus on the
original upsurge of an experience in consciousness (in "primary passivity", i.e.
in original passive experience as opposed to the "secondary passivity" which
involves the intervention of the will) and on the gradual settling down of that
experience into something that is merely habitually retained, perhaps at the
lowest level of sensory experience (e.g. we can get used to the hum of the
computer fan and no longer notice it after a while).
For many years, Cartesian Meditations and Experience and Judgment were
the main sources where Husserl's explorations of habituality could be read.
However, as a result of the publication of the Nachlass in the Husserliana
edition (almost 40 volumes since 1950), we now know that habit is very much
in thematic discussion in several of Husserl's works, most notably in Ideas II
(Husserliana volume IV, especially sections 29 and 56), which both Heidegger
and Merleau-Ponty had read in typescript; in the Intersubjectivity volumes
60

edited by Iso Kern (especially Husserliana volumes XIV and XV); in Husserl's
Phenomenological Psychology lectures of 1925 (Husserliana IX), and
elsewhere.
Delineating the Concept of Habit in Husserl
'Habit', for Husserl, picks out an extraordinary range of complex behaviour,
both individual and social, both corporeal and cultural. Habits first and foremost
attach to individuals understood as persons: "Each individual has his or her
habits" (Jedes Individuum hat seine Gewohnheiten).67 I am who I am on the
basis of my habits. The ego is a "substrate of habitualities". There are different
perceptual manners (Habitus), from simple seeing to the kind of picture-
consciousness (Bildbewusstsein) one operates in looking at a painting or
postcard of a subject.68
For Husserl, in his elaborate and multi-layered analyses, habits operate not
just at the level of perceptual experience (where we group similar experiences
together in various regulated ways), at the level of the embodied self, but also
at the level of judgments and what Husserl calls 'convictions' (Überzeugungen).
When I make a decision, this is not just an atomic element of my knowledge,
but it actually affects my whole self. I become, as Husserl puts it, abidingly
thus-and-so decided.69 For Husserl, these convictions attach themselves to the
ego. I become a Labour-supporter, etc. These convictions become possessions
or 'havings' of an ego. Having a conviction is not at all the same as
remembering that one once decided something. Furthermore, what was decided
can be returned to and reactivated without having to run through the associated
judgments of evidence. Through these convictions, I have the constituted sense
of being as a 'fixed and abiding personal ego' (als stehendes und bleibendes
personales Ich).70 As Husserl puts it in Intersubjectivity volume XIV:
I am not only an actual but I am also a habitual ego, and habituality signifies a certain egoic
possibility, an 'I can' or 'I could', or 'I would have been able to', and this ability become actual
refers to ego-actualities, to actual ego-experiences, that is, as actualization of ability. In a word,
I am (and without this would not be an I, I can not think of myself otherwise), an ego of
capacities.71
Husserl occasionally talks as if the ego were an empty 'I-pole' (Ichpol) that
simply guarantees continuities in my experience (in the manner of the Kantian
transcendental ego), but in fact, in Cartesian Meditations and elsewhere, he
speaks of the fully concrete ego which is always laden with 'habitualities' and
world-engaging acts. Husserl talks about a "style" (Lebensstil)72 and indeed an
"overall style" (Gesamtstil).73 Thus, in Cartesian Meditations § 32, Husserl
introduces the term habitus as an enduring "state" whereby I can be said to
"abide" by my decision. The decision informs me. Through these acquired
decisions as convictions I constitute myself as a stable and abiding ego,
someone with, Husserl says, "a personal character".74 These habits are not just
61

individual ways of behaving but include lasting decisions, values, and
judgments made by an individual that have been adopted in the course of his or
her life. In this regard, Husserl says that the word 'custom' (Sitte) summarizes
this idea of habitual action and behaviour in the social sphere.75 Overall, as
Husserl writes in his Intersubjectivity writings, the ego is stabilized by its fixed
habits and possessions: "I with my firm habitus, with determinate habits of self-
having, acting, thinking and speaking, and so on" (Ich mit seinem festen
Habitus, mit bestimmten Gewohnheiten des Sich-gehabens, Wirkens, des
Denkens und Redens usw.).76
Habitus, moreover, is not just a matter of intellectual attitude or conviction,
for it can also be a matter of desire, feeling, or emotion. In this sense, Husserl
describes personal love as a "lasting habitus" (dauerender Habitus).77 Husserl
recognizes the complex character of our feelings (Gefühle), as well as our
intertwined emotional and affective states (Zustände), acts of empathy,
sympathy, love, fellow feeling, and so on, as well as acts of willing (important
for our ethical lives). All of these can have a habitual character, a particular
style of being lived through.
Association (Assoziation) and Habit
According to Husserl's genetic phenomenological analysis, as we have been
emphasizing, habit plays a crucial role on all the different levels of human
experience. At the lowest level are the habits associated with our pre-conscious
and certainly pre-egoic desires and drives (Triebe).78 Contrary to the portrayal
of Husserl as a Cartesian, in fact Husserl does acknowledge the role of instinct,
drives, and what he broadly calls "interests".79 He recognizes that something has
to awaken consciousness in the first place, that there belongs to it at a most
primitive level a passive being-affected but also a kind of reaching out or desire,
a focusing of interest, leading to something becoming a "theme" (Thema) for
consciousness. Conscious life is a "life of interests" (Interessenleben),
beginning with sensuousness and gradually focusing outwards and rising to
rational desires. So habituality has a non-cognitive, passive character, but at
the higher levels it is penetrated by egoic involvement.
Already in his Logical Investigations, the general notion of "association" is
discussed (at LU I § 4) as a connection being forced on us between two psychic
experiences and not just the co-presence of these experiences in consciousness.
Husserl discusses the "associative connections" between similars.80 There is a
"felt mutual belongingness" between experiences. Furthermore, although we
never have exactly the same experiences again, Husserl notes that we do speak
about having the same wish, the same feeling, and so on. The idea is that we
have the same species of feeling, even though the individual tokens of that
feeling may be different. While each episode of experiencing is unique, there
is a consciousness of identity (an experience of synthesis) across different
62

individual episodes. But, at this point, Husserl does not explore in greater detail
the nature of the intentional processes that go to make up the sense of similarity,
identity, and so on. 
By 1912, however, as exemplified in Ideas II, Husserl has identified the
notion of 'habit' (Gewohnheit), especially in §§54-56 where he is discussing
motivation as "the fundamental lawfulness of spiritual life" (Die Motivation
als Grundgesetz der geistigen Welt). Here again he explains habit in terms of
the functioning of a primitive "association" (Assoziation) which functions
unnoticed in our comportment. The seeing of A "reminds" us of the seeing of
B; "the similar motivates the similar under similar circumstances".81 Many years
later, in Cartesian Meditations §39, Husserl discusses "association" as a
principle of passive genesis. Association is never blindly mechanical for
Husserl; intentionality is always involved.82 The true nature of association can
be understood only in terms of eidetic laws, not empirical laws: "association is
a fundamental concept belonging to the transcendental phenomenology".83
Association is a concept that Husserl takes from the empiricists (specifically
Berkeley and Hume) but which he construes as a feature of transcendental life
rather than a matter of empirical regularity. In fact, Husserl regularly criticizes
Hume and the empiricists for their mechanical concept of association (and
Scheler makes similar criticisms in his Formalism in Ethics).84 Husserl accuses
Hume of circularity in attempting to understand habit in terms of causality,
while at the same time explaining causality in terms of custom and habit.85 One
has to be careful in linking Husserl's notion of Habitus or Habitualität too
closely to Hume. It has been pointed out that German translations of Ferguson
and Hume often rendered 'custom' or 'habit' as 'Fähigkeit' or 'Art'.86 Husserl
himself usually employs Gewohnheit in reference to Hume's 'habit', e.g. he
characterizes Hume as talking about the empirical-psychological laws of
"association and habit" (Assoziation und Gewohnheit) as regulating
experience.87 Indeed, Husserl had already recognized Berkeley as explaining
natural causality in terms of habitual association and "expectation"
(Erwartung).88 For Husserl, Hume is a philosopher who explains the laws of
nature in terms of laws of habit which simply belong to human nature as such.89
Particularly in his mature writings (especially in his Passive Synthesis
lectures90 and Experience and Judgment) Husserl portrays association and
passive synthesis as operating across the whole of psychic life, but as particularly
dominant at the pre-predicative level. There are various kinds of association.
One is a kind of part-whole synthesis. In Passive Synthesis he writes:
The part 'demands' the whole—something uniform awakens something else that is uniform,
which is not yet at all constituted as a unity explicitly for itself; and it does not demand the
whole by a pure and simple awakening, but rather by a co-connected 'expectation,' by the
demand as coexisting as co-belonging to the unity. Even the force of this apperceptive
expectation increases with the number of "instances"—or with habit, which amounts to the
same thing.91
63

Husserl is primarily concerned with our perceptual experiences of physical
objects which are always given with a profile (Abschattung), which itself points
towards and links with other possible available profiles delineated in advance
by the overall horizon. Similarly, each temporal mode of the ego couples with
the previous and the following ones. There are sensed continuities at the very
heart of experience. Husserl in his Passive Synthesis lectures attempts to get at
these basic sensed continuities, similarities and so on. At the lowest level,
similar circumstances call for similar actions.92 When I see something,
something vague stimulates me to get up and take a closer look: "Something
reminds me of something else that is similar, and the similarity prods me to
compare and distinguish them."93
Husserl speaks of an "entire realm of association and habits".94 Most
motivation is buried deep in the psyche such that perhaps it can be found only
by something like psychoanalysis.95 There is something Husserl calls 'passive
motivation'. He describes habit as the 'first law': if one once believed
something there is a tendency to continue to believe it, to take it up again as
true.96 This kind of habitual motivation is not the same as active position-taking
which involves the ego and which the ego must take possession of and direct.
The lowest desires and drives are not, properly speaking, acts of the ego;
they do not belong to what Husserl, following Kant, calls our "spontaneity" in
the full sense.97 He speaks of the "living and striving" (leben und streben) of the
conscious self, where the element of 'striving' refers to the drives and interests
of consciousness. The primary striving of consciousness is towards sustaining
life itself: "my being is self-preservation".98 Husserl analyses the complex
layerings of our pre-predicative life, our drives, our being affected, our being
drawn towards certain things through a kind of "attraction", "stimulus" or
"allure" (Reiz), our "habits", "convictions", "attitudes", and other
"sedimentations". But besides considering the unacknowledged horizons of
cogitationes as belonging to the unconscious, Husserl is more usually focused
on the manner in which our conscious products settle down or sediment into
convictions which I hold but which I do not consciously have to frame (the
domain usually referred to as 'pre-conscious'). 
Husserl acknowledges these more or less unconscious instincts, but his main
point seems to be that the appearing world is always already a pre-given world
appearing to a certain highly structured embodied set of sensuous perceivings.
He speaks of a certain "affectedness" (Affektion) of the senses and pays attention
to the manner in which this already predisposes the object to appear in a certain
way. He also recognizes that these instinctive drives are layered over and appear
in higher forms in more complex conscious acts. But overall, in his work it is
the structure of conscious life that is the primary focus of his attention.99
In his discussion of "habitualities" (Habitualitäten) in Experience and
Judgment Husserl emphasizes that no experience is ephemeral, but rather leaves
64

some kind of lasting "trace" (Spur). Even a conviction repudiated is still a
conviction-that-once-was-believed. This trace becomes accommodated into a
habituality which eventually has the character of an "empty" practical
possessing. These habitualities are precisely not memories. They may even have
been forgotten; certainly the original awakening moments, Urstiftungen, can
be forgotten. Nevertheless, a new sense or meaning has been acquired, an object
(substrate) is perceived with certain properties (explications). Thus he writes:
No apprehension is merely momentary and ephemeral. To be sure, as this lived experience of the
apprehension of a substrate and an explicate, it has, like every lived experience, its mode of
original emergence in the now, to which is adjoined its progressive sinking (Herabsinken) into
corresponding non-original modes: retentional reverberation and, finally, submersion (Versinken)
into the totally empty, dead past (leere, unlebendige Vergangenheit). This lived experience itself,
and the objective moment constituted in it, may become "forgotten"; but for all this, it in no way
disappears without a trace (spurlos); it has merely become latent. With regard to what has been
constituted in it, it is a possession in the form of a habitus (ein habitueller Besitz) ready at any
time to be awakened anew by an active association . . . The object has incorporated into itself the
forms of sense (Sinnesgestalten) originally constituted in the acts of explication by virtue of a
knowledge in the form of a habitus (als habituelles Wissen).100
Husserl emphasizes that this level of primary association happens already at
the pre-egoic level of passivity (Passivität).101 We are at the lowest level of
egoic activity, not at all at the level of the full conscious person. Experiences
are awakened in us, something (a new noise or smell) is experienced against the
background of the unnoticed familiar, and has the effect of being a "stimulus"
or "allure" (Reiz) on the conscious ego that apprehends it.102 In apprehending
the stimulus, the ego turns towards it and its 'interest' is awakened.
In Experience and Judgment and elsewhere Husserl offers a deep and careful
account of how primary "awakening" experiences become registered in a way
that they eventually are incorporated (like a snowball gathering snow as it is
rolled across the snow-covered lawn) and become a lasting possession. There
is a genuine sense of Habitus here as evolving downwards from alert experience
into somnolent lasting tradition.
Social Habituality, Normality and 'Tradition'
Indeed, crucially, as we have been insisting, Husserl talks of habituality not
just in relation to the formation of the individual person and character but also
in relation to the social and cultural spheres, the sphere of "spirit" (Geist). In this
regard, in a text from 1921/1922 Husserl speaks not only of the habituality that
belongs to the "single ego" (Einzel-Ich), but also of 'a social habituality' (eine
Gemeinschaftshabitualität) which may also be called a 'tradition' (eine
Tradition).103 This social and collective character is crucial, as we have seen, for
the manner in which the concept of habitus is taken up by Bourdieu. For
Bourdieu, habitus produces individual and collective practices; it is a more or
less anonymous collective system for instituting, passing along, and stabilizing
practices in a society. Habit, as Boudieu puts it (following Aristotle), gets
65

"internalized as second nature"; it becomes a "state of the body" not a "state of
mind", and gets "forgotten as history".104 In this sense, for Bourdieu, habitus
becomes a kind of "incorporation", a bodily instantiation of a routine, but also
a kind of social production and reproduction (class-based habitus might include
a tendency to opt for fast food as opposed to home cooking, and so on). Indeed,
in pre-literate societies, it is precisely the body that incorporates cultural habitus:
in the pre-literate societies "inherited knowledge can only survive in the
incorporated state".105 Bourdieu stresses the anonymous, passive and
conservative nature of habitus and, in declared opposition to his version of
Husserl, downplays the role of individual agents in the generation of habitus.
Husserl, however, tries to find a way to account for the operation of habitus
both at the individual and social level, and to document the transformations
undergone in the move from one level to another.
Husserl describes how reflective higher-level states arise out of lower pre-
reflective states. He acknowledges that both individuals and social and ethnic
groupings have their own habitus. Thus he writes about shared physical
similarities: "we count races in this way in so far as the commonality of outer
physical habitus goes hand in hand with social characteristics".106 We recognize
people on the basis of familiar patterns, family resemblances (including physical
traits), social typicalities, and so on - precisely those schemata, sometimes
called "stereotypes" (not necessarily in a prejudicial sense) by psychologists.107
The ego does not constitute itself through reflection but through living
through its interests which are directed away from itself towards the world. The
ego arises out of 'life':
I am the subject of my life, and the subject develops by living; what it primarily experiences is
not itself, but instead it constitutes objects of nature, goods, instruments, etc. What it primarily
forms and structures as active is not itself but things for work. The Ego does not originally arise
out of experience—in the sense of an associative apperception in which are constituted unities
of manifolds of a nexus—but out of life (it is what it is not for the Ego, but it is itself the ego).108
Husserl here is struggling to articulate (using, perhaps unfortunately, the stale
language of the "ego" and "life") a dynamic conception of selfhood as lived
out: "The ego exercises itself; it habituates itself"; it acquires capacities, sets
itself goals. I learn to play the piano but I set myself the goal of playing better.
Moreover, personal development is influenced by other people: "Others'
thoughts penetrate into my soul". On this point, Husserl says that one acquires
the habitus of others, more or less as one takes over a habitus in the individual
sphere. He offers his own version of Heidegger's 'das Man' experience:
Besides the tendencies which proceed from other individual persons, there are demands which
arise in the intentional form of indeterminate generality, the demands of morality (Sitte), of
custom (des Brauchs), of tradition, of the spiritual milieu: 'one' judges in this way („man"
urteilt so), 'one' has to hold his fork like this, and so on,—i.e. demands of the social group, of
the class, etc. They can be followed quite passively, or one can also actively take a position
with regard to them and make a free decision in favour of them.109
66

Life-World and Normativity
Husserl has been criticized by Habermas and others for downplaying the
normativity inherent in the life-world. In his Theory of Communicative Action110
Habermas acknowledges that he borrowed his concept of the life-world from
Husserl and Schütz,111 and is impressed by its "always already there" character
of immediate certainty, its culturally transmitted and linguistically structured
character.112 Roughly speaking, for Habermas, the life-world is the horizon
within which human agents act. Society can be conceived in terms of the
activities of agents or simply as a self-regulating system. The systematic
approach tends to neglect the roles of individual agents. Habermas moves away
from Husserl's emphasis on "the philosophy of consciousness" to emphasize the
importance of the life-world as the background for mutual understanding, for
action, and for the development of communicative rationality.113 For Habermas,
the social world is mediated, materially reproduced, and symbolically
structured. It can also be colonized by different processes, including economic
ones, which he labels "system" (drawing on systems theory), leading to a
distortion of communication, reification and alienation. Habermas focuses on
the manner in which the life-world has to reproduce itself through socialization,
communication, integration, stabilization and so on. The life-world underpins
communicative action but "systems" (including that of scientific technicity)
tend to distort the life-world.
I believe that Habermas—and Bourdieu—neglect the role of "normality"
and "optimality" as repeatedly discussed by Husserl (e.g. in Ideas II in regard
to the normalities and optimalities involved in perception, where, for instance,
we take the colour of an object to be as it appears in bright daylight but without
reflection). For Husserl, normality (Normalität) expresses how the world is
necessarily given in a horizon of familiarity.114 Various objects encountered are
revealed in experience through the unity of present, past and future, with the
remembered experience delineating an essential order according to which we
expect to experience new objects (Husserl's pre-conception, Vorgriff, Vorhabe).
Everything presented to experience is characterized as 'normal' (according to
an outlined 'style') or 'abnormal' (where there is a break or disruption of the
pre-delineated intentions or expectations). This concept of normality is
extremely broad and deals not only with the way in which an individual subject
experiences worldly objects, but expresses in particular the manner of givenness
of the intersubjective world with its normal course or flow of harmonious
confirmations.115 Normality is experienced as "concordance" (Einstimmigkeit)
with regard to perceptual objects,116 or, as practical familiarity with certain
experiences and circumstances,117 or, again, as lack or deficiency of certain
faculties and capacities.118 With reference to the life-world, Husserl explicates
the relationship between normality and abnormality as the experience of the
"homeworld" (Heimwelt) or "nearworld" (Nahwelt) versus the "alienworld"
67

(Fremdwelt). Communal life, including language practices, is lived according
to the familiar habits and traditions shared by a community or culture: the
homeworld. Moreover, the different senses of normality can be interwoven and
have an interrelatedness. Congenital blindness, for example - an example
actually given by Husserl - may be lived as normal (perhaps within a family or
social group that shares this condition) and at the same time it presents
something abnormal, as compared with others who have something that for the
blind person is unknown. Habit is responsible for the organization of experience
into horizons of familiarity and unfamiliarity and indeed for the whole process
of the sedimentation of culture as tradition into something like a history (the
theme of Husserl's Crisis, Origin of Geometry and other late writings).
Habitus and the Style of Nature
Finally, it is important to understand that for Husserl, habituality is a
constituting structure and principle (and, despite his own reservations,
Bourdieu's way of describing it as a structuring principle aptly captures
Husserl's intention) at work not just in the constitution of our personal, social
and cultural worlds, but also in the very manner in which nature appears. In
the discussion of modern Galilean physics in Crisis §9, for instance, the term
'habit' (Gewohnheit) is used in quite a specific sense to express the course of
the world itself. Husserl speaks of causation in the natural and human world as
having its own routine way of proceeding, its 'habit':
The things of the intuited surrounding world (always taken as they are intuitively there for us
in everyday life and count as actual) have, so to speak, their "habits" (Gewohnheiten)—they
behave similarly under typically similar circumstances. If we take the intuitable world as a
whole, in the flowing present in which it is straightforwardly there for us, it has even as a whole
its "habit," (Gewohnheit), i.e., that of continuing habitually as it has up to now. Thus our
empirically intuited surrounding world has an empirical over-all style.119
The world as a whole has a habituality. Husserl speaks of nature's "universal
causal style" (der universale Kausalstil).120 Likewise in his Phenomenological
Psychology lectures (1925), he speaks of the habitus or overall regular pattern
of causation in the natural world.121 There is a kind of typicality and regularity
attaching to the world of nature. Of course this regularity of nature does not
manifest the strict uniformity and the necessity found in the mathematical
scientific modelling of nature. The course of nature is typical but has
exceptions; it settles down into a regular course of what in general happens,
what is typical, and so on. Husserl is insistent therefore that the natural world—
and not just the social world—discloses itself through habitualities.
Habit as the Possession of an Attitude
In an even larger sense, habit is also understood by Husserl as the manner in
which an overall "attitude" or "stance" or "collective mindset" (Einstellung) is
lived through. Interestingly, this is the primary meaning of habit (Habitus,
68

Gewohnheit) as Husserl discusses it in his 1910/1911 Logos essay 'Philosophy
as a Rigorous Science'.122 There, Husserl writes of 'habitus' as an overall
disposition of, for instance, a natural scientific researcher:
In 
keeping 
with 
their 
respective 
habits 
of 
interpretation 
(herrschenden
Auffassungsgewohnheiten), the natural scientist is inclined to regard everything as nature,
whereas the investigator in the human sciences is inclined to regard everything as spirit, as a
historical construct, and thus both thereby misinterpret whatever cannot be so regarded.123
Similarly, he claims that "It is not easy for us to overcome the primeval habit
(die urwüchsige Gewohnheit) of living and thinking in the naturalistic attitude
and thus of naturalistically falsifying the psychical."124 And again:
Experience as personal habitus is the precipitation of acts of natural, experiential position-taking
that have occurred in the course of life (Erfahrung als persönlicher Habitus ist der Niederschlag
der im Ablauf des Lebens vorangegangenen Akte natürlicher erfahrender Stellungnahme). This
habitus is essentially conditioned by the way in which the personality, as this particular
individuality, is motivated by acts of its own experience and no less by the way in which it
takes in foreign and transmitted experiences by approving of or rejecting them.125
There is, furthermore, a difference between the habit (Habitus) of the natural
man in his daily living, and that of the phenomenologist. The mature Husserl
has a sense of habitus as forming an essential part of the character or attitude
of natural life and also of expressing the self-consciously adopted stance of the
phenomenologist. Husserl speaks of the "theoretical habitus"126 of the scientist
and philosopher and even of the "habitus of the epoché".127 In a supplement
written around 1924 to the Basic Problems of Phenomenology, Husserl writes: 
The habitus of the phenomenological epoché is a thematic habitus, for the sake of obtaining
certain themes, the discoveries of theoretical and practical truths, and to obtain a certain purely
self-contained system of knowledge. This thematic habitus, however, excludes to a certain
extent the habitus of positivity. Only in its being closed off to the latter does it lead to the self-
contained unity of phenomenology as "first" philosophy, the science of transcendental pure
subjectivity.128
He contrasts the "phenomenological habitus" of personal self-observation to
the more usual habitus of anonymous living in the natural attitude. In this sense,
habitus expresses the manner in which stance-taking is informed by a certain
discipline or practice of viewing and considering. In the phenomenological
reduction, the habitual survives but in altered form. As Husserl puts it in his
Intersubjectivity volume XIV: "But through the phenomenological reduction,
I put the world out of validity, only my world-experiencing, my world-
believing, my world-vouching, my corresponding habituality and so on, remain
available but now as purely subjective."129
In its normal course of the natural attitude, life is lived habitually. The natural
attitude is an attitude that obscures itself and remains unknown to itself. It is an
attitude with blinkers (Scheuklappen) on, as Husserl often says. It can therefore
only be brought to light by a radical "alteration of attitude"
(Einstellungsänderung). But, nota bene, the natural attitude as a habitus remains
available in the light of the new attitude; it is not negated or invalidated.
69

Furthermore, Husserl (and many other philosophers of the period including
Scheler) maintained that the natural attitude preoccupied human culture for
millennia until it was awoken from its dogmatic slumbers by the breakthrough
of philosophy with its discovery of the purely theoretical attitude.130 In the
natural attitude, a particular habituality inhabits and permeates our own first-
person bodily experience, our experience of temporality, our attitude towards
physical objects, space, time, causation, personhood, continuity of existence of
entities, the whole manner in which the world is presented as surrounding
world, familiar world, and so on. There is a "general thesis" (Generalthesis) or
universal positing in operation which includes an overall presumption of
actuality, of being really there. It is from within this context of the natural
attitude and of regular flowing life that any understanding of phenomenology
must begin. Phenomenology steps sideways to observe the flow of life, rather
as the cinema buff having initially been absorbed in the flow of the story on
screen, then shifts her gaze to the flow of givenness, the manner in which shots
are taken, how long they are, etc. Ultimately, for Husserl, the whole "world"
becomes understood not as static "being in itself" but as the harmonious
flowing, consolidating, and confirmation of experiences in their respective
contexts and horizons. The world's habitualities are revealed as correlated and
in tune with the habitualities of human subjects. We experience the world in a
typical manner, the world has an ongoing and enduring significance for us.131
Conclusion
Clearly, in this paper we have only scratched the surface of Husserl's complex
accounts of habit as found dispersed across his writings. He does not offer a
theory of habit and habituality as such (and certainly not one that involves
explanation in the manner of the positive sciences);132 rather he identifies and
describes the manifestations and workings of habit at different levels in
conscious experience, from the habituality of drives and instincts, through the
perceptual and motor intentionality of the embodied subject, on to the collective
forms of habit experienced in society and which he summarizes under the notion
of "tradition". Although Bourdieu believes he is departing from Husserl's naïve
and overly subjective descriptions, in fact the French sociologist is articulating
quite precisely the kinds of generative structures to which Husserl himself drew
attention. Bourdieu does not fully appreciate that Husserl's account of habituality
belongs within his overall "genetic phenomenology". This is a phenomenology
which has to give an account not just of the "static" constitution of the world, but
of the coming-to-be of constituted meanings. It involves a new procedure of
"retrogression" (Rückgang),133
"regressive inquiry" (Rückfragen),134
a
"destruction" or "de-construction" (Abbau)135 of our constituted experience to
uncover a domain of constituting operations that include the passive syntheses
of association and the overall functioning of habituality.
70

Similarly, Hubert Dreyfus presents his Heidegger- and Merleau-Ponty-
inspired account of absorbed coping as a deliberate overcoming of Husserl's
supposedly Cartesian philosophy of consciousness and representationality,
whereas in fact the mature Husserl recognizes the complexity of "functioning
intentionality" working anonymously, and has himself described the kind of
embodied habitus (leiblicher Habitus) which is later described in more detail by
Merleau-Ponty.
University College Dublin
References
1. Edmund Husserl, Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen
Philosophie. Zweites Buch: Phänomenologische Untersuchungen zur Konstitution, hrsg.
Marly Biemel, Husserliana IV (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1991), trans. R. Rojcewicz and A.
Schuwer as Ideas pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological
Philosophy, Second Book (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1989). Hereafter 'Ideas II', followed by
English pagination, Husserliana (hereafter 'Hua') volume and German pagination. 
2. See E. Husserl, Zur Phänomenologie der Intersubjektivität. Texte aus dem Nachlass, Hua
XV, xxxviii. Iso Kern (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1973). 
3. See the entries by Gerhart Funke, 'Gewohnheit' and 'Habitus', in Historisches Wörterbuch
der Philosophie, ed. J. Ritter et al (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1971-
2007), Band III, p. 616 and p. 1123.
4. It has been suggested that hexis in Greek never means mindless routine but suggests a degree
of awareness and self-possession in action. Aristotle also uses both hexis and 'ethos' and some
have suggested that hexis is better rendered by disposition while ethos is translated as 'habit'.
However, in the tradition, hexis was translated as habitus in Latin whereas ethos was translated
consuetudo.
5. David Hume Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, in Enquiries Concerning Human
Understanding and Concerning the Principles of Morals, edited by L. A. Selby-Bigge, 3rd
edition revised by P. H. Nidditch (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975), Section 5 Part 1.
6. Hume Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, op. cit.
7. See Richard Cobb-Stevens, 'Association and Sameness in James's Principles of Psychology',
in Michael DeArmey, Lester Embree, and Stephen Skousgaard, eds. The Philosophical
Psychology of William James (Washington: University Press of America, 1986), pp. 95-111.
8. William James, Principles of Psychology (1890), as quoted in Bill Pollard, 'Habitual Actions',
in Timothy O'Connor and Constantine Sandis, eds. , A Companion to the Philosophy of Action
(Oxford: Blackwell, 2010), pp. 74-82, see p. 76.
9. See especially Gilbert Ryle, The Concept of Mind (London: Hutchinson, 1949), Chapter 2 on
'Knowing How and Knowing That' and Chapter 5, Section 3, on capacities and tendencies.
But see Jason Stanley and Tim Williamson, 'Knowing How', Journal of Philosophy, vol. 98
no. 8 (2001), pp. 411-444, who want to claim that knowing-how is really a sub-species of
knowing-that.
10. See Jerry Fodor, 'The Appeal to Tacit Knowledge in Psychological Explanation', Journal of
Philosophy 65 (1968), pp. 627-640, and Michael Polanyi, 'Tacit Knowing', in his The Tacit
Dimension (Garden City, New York: Doubleday & Co, 1966).
11. Husserl is, for example, omitted from Timothy O'Connor and Constantine Sandis, eds, A
Companion to the Philosophy of Action (Oxford: Blackwell, 2010).
12. For a discussion of the sociological and anthropological background to Bourdieu's conception
of habit, see David Schwartz, 'The Sociology of Habit: The Perspective of Pierre Bourdieu',
OTJR: Occupation, Participation and Health, vol. 22, No. 1 (Winter 2002, Supplement), pp.
615-695.
71

13. See especially the chapter 'Structures, Habitus, Practices' in Pierre Bourdieu, The Logic of
Practice (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1990), pp. 52-65; idem, 'The Genesis of the
Concepts of Habitus and Field ', Sociocriticism, vol. 2 no. 2 (1985), pp. 11-24; and idem,
Outline of a Theory of Practice (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1977). See also
the critical discussion of Bourdieu in 'Habit or Habitus?' in Andrew Strathern, Body Thoughts
(Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1996), pp. 25-40.
14. Bourdieu, The Logic of Practice, pp. 53.
15. See the excellent assessment by C. Jason Throop and Keith M. Murphy, 'Bourdieu and
Phenomenology: A Critical Assessment', Anthropological Theory, vol. 2 no. 2 (2002), pp.
185-207.
16. Marcel Mauss' classic essay on this topic is 'Techniques du corps', Journal de Psychologie,
vol. 3 no. 2 (1935), pp. 271-93, trans. Ben Brewster as 'Techniques of the Body', Economy
and Society, vol. 2 no. 1 (1973), pp. 70-89.
17. See Norbert Elias, Über den Prozess der Zivilisation, 2 vols (Basel: Suhrkamp, 1939), trans.
Edmund Jephcott, The Civilizing Process, vol. I, The History of Manners (Oxford: Blackwell,
1969), and Vol. II, State Formation and Civilization (Oxford: Blackwell, 1982); revised
edition in one volume by Eric Dunning, Stephen Mennell et al (Oxford: Blackwell, 2000).
Elias has a long discussion of the evolution of what he calls the 'European habitus' over
centuries, including modes of speech, eating habits, use of cutlery, personal habits (e.g.
'blowing one's nose, spitting), dressing for dining and bed, mannerisms, and so on.
18. See Pierre Bourdieu, 'Response to Throop and Murphy' [a response to C. Jason Throop and
Keith M. Murphy, 'Bourdieu and Phenomenology: A Critical Assessment'], in
Anthropological Theory, vol. 2 no. 2 (2002), p. 209.
19. See Pierre Bourdieu, Pascalian Meditations (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2000),
pp. 81-82. For his account of Husserl's Habitus and Habitualität, Bourdieu refers specifically
to Husserl's Experience and Judgment, § 12 and Ideas II, § 29.
20. See Pierre Bourdieu, Outline of a Theory of Practice, p. 21.
21. For an indication of how habit and skilful coping have returned centre stage in the cognitive
sciences, see, inter alia, Andy Clark, 'Skills, Spills, and the Nature of Mindful Action',
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, vol. 1, no. 4 (2002), pp. 385-87; Louise M.
Antony, 'How to Play the Flute', Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, vol. 1, no. 4
(2002), pp. 395-401; and Michael Wheeler, Reconstructing the Cognitive World: The Next
Step (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005).
22. See Hubert L. Dreyfus, 'Intelligence without Representation: the Relevance of Phenomenology
to Scientific Explanation', Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, vol 1, no. 4 (2002),
pp. 367-83; and his 'Refocusing the Question: Can there be Skilful Coping without
Propositional Representations or Brain Representations?' Phenomenology and the Cognitive
Sciences 1, no. 4 (2002): 413-25. But see also Evan Selinger & Robert P. Crease, 'Dreyfus on
Expertise: The Limits of Phenomenological Analysis', Continental Philosophy Review, no. 35
(2002), pp. 245-279; and Sean Dorrance Kelly, 'Grasping at Straws: Motor Intentionality and
the Cognitive Science of Skilful Action', in Jeff Malpas & Mark Wrathall (eds), Heidegger,
Coping, and Cognitive Science (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000), pp. 161-177.
23. See Hubert Dreyfus, 'Detachment, Involvement, and Rationality: Are we Essentially Rational
Animals?' Human Affairs, vol. 17 (2007), pp. 101-109; and idem, 'Overcoming the Myth of
the Mental: How Philosophers Can Profit from the Phenomenology of Everyday Expertise',
Presidential Address, Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association,
vol. 79, Issue 2 (November 2005). See John McDowell's reply, 'What Myth?' Inquiry, vol.
50 no. 4 (2007), pp. 338-351; and his 'Response to Dreyfus', Inquiry, vol. 50 no. 4 (2007),
pp. 366- 370. Dreyfus has further replied in his 'Response to McDowell', Inquiry, vol. 50 no.
4 (2007), pp. 371-377.
24. See Ideas II § 57.
25. Hubert L. Dreyfus offers a somewhat caricatured Cartesian account of Husserl in his Being-
in-the-World (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press., 1991). For a way in which McDowell could
72

accommodate Husserl, see Carleton B. Christensen, 'From McDowell to Husserl and Beyond',
Self and World—From Analytic Philosophy to Phenomenology (Berlin: Walter de Gruyter,
2008), pp. 362-379.
26. See Bill Pollard, 'Explaining Actions with Habits', American Philosophical Quarterly, 43 (
2006), pp. 57-68. It is not clear why Pollard regards alcoholism as 'automatic' given that it is
possible for alcoholics to avoid drinking alcohol. Similarly, cognitive therapies of various
kinds can be effective in treating phobias. A degree of ego-involvement must be allowed in
these conditions. See also his 'Habitual Actions', in Timothy O'Connor and Constantine
Sandis, eds, A Companion to the Philosophy of Action (Oxford: Blackwell, 2010), pp. 74-82.
27. See Jean-Paul Sartre, The Transcendence of the Ego (New York: Noonday Press, 1957), p. 48f.
28. See Hua XIII 76. In this sense, certain gestures, facial expressions, mannerisms of various
kinds exemplify an individual's style.
29. See for instance, Iris Marion Young, 'Throwing Like a Girl: A Phenomenology of Feminine
Body Comportment, Motility, and Spatiality' in her collection, Throwing Like a Girl
(Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1990), pp. 141-159; and Maxine Sheets-Johnstone,
'Kinesthetic Memory'. Theoria et Historia Scientiarum, no. 7 (2003), pp. 69-92.
30. See Ideas II § 61.
31. Edith Stein, Zum Problem der Einfühlung (Halle: Buchdruckerei des Waisenhauses, 1917,
reprinted München: Verlagsgesellschaft Gerhard Kaffke, 1980), p. 56; trans. Waltraut Stein,
On the Problem of Empathy (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1964; 3rd ed., reprinted Washington, DC:
ICS Publications, 1989).p. 51.
32. See Ideas II § 61.
33. Ideas II § 59, p, 267; Hua IV, p. 255, translation modified.
34. See M. Merleau-Ponty, Phénoménologie de la perception (Paris: Gallimard, 1945), trans. C.
Smith as Phenomenology of Perception (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1962). Henceforth
'PP' followed by page number of English translation followed by the pagination of the original
French edition.
35. PP 82/97. There are four occurrences of 'habitus' in this text: PP 137/160; 293/339; 327/377.
Merleau-Ponty speaks both of a bodily and a cultural habitus. He also speaks more generally
about 'habit' (l'habitude).
36. PP 293/339.
37. PP 82/97-98.
38. PP 143/167.
39. PP 143/168.
40. PP 144/169.
41. See PP 146/172.
42. PP 238/275-76.
43. A. Schütz, Der sinnhafte Aufbau der sozialen Welt (1932; reprinted Frankfurt am Main:
Suhrkamp Taschenbuch Verlag, 1974), trans. George Walsh and Frederick Lehnert as
Phenomenology of the Social World (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1967;
London: Heinemann, 1972).
44. See Alfred Schütz, 'Type and Eidos in Husserl's Late Philosophy', in Schütz, Collected
Papers III, op. cit., pp. 92-115.
45. See Alfred Schütz and Thomas Luckmann, Die Strukturen der Lebenswelt, trans. Richard M.
Zaner and H. Tristram Engelhardt, Jr., The Structures of the Life-World (Evanston, IL:
Northwestern University Press, 1973), pp. 135ff.
46. Alfred Schütz and Thomas Luckmann, The Structures of the Life-World, op. cit., p. 144.
47. See Max Scheler, Der Formalismus in der Ethik und die materiale Wertethik. Neuer Versuch
der Grundlegung eines ethischen Personalismus, vol. 1 (1913); vol. 2 ( 1916), now in
Gesammelte Werke, ed. Maria Scheler, Band 2 (Bern/München: Francke Verlag, 1954); trans.
Manfred S. Frings and Roger L. Funk as Formalism in Ethics and Non-Formal Ethics of
Values. A New Attempt Toward a Foundation of An Ethical Personalism (Evanston, IL:
Northwestern University Press, 1973), p. 514.
73

48. See Pierre Bourdieu, 'The Habitus and the Space of Life-Styles', in Distinction: A Social
Critique of the Judgement of Taste, trans. Richard Nice (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1984), pp. 169-215.
49. See Eugen Fink, 'Operative Concepts in Husserl's Phenomenology', translated by William
McKenna, in William McKenna, Robert M. Harlan, and Laurence E. Winters, eds., Apriori
and World. European Contributions to Husserlian Phenomenology (The Hague: Nijhoff,
1981), pp. 56-70.
50. Husserl is not particularly consistent in his terminology. The term 'Gewohnheit', for instance,
does not occur at all in Cartesian Meditations.
51. The term 'Habitus' occurs in everyday German, formed from the Latin, and has the meaning
of 'manner' or even 'mannerism', e.g. 'he has a funny manner' (Er hat einen komischen
Habitus). I am grateful to Sebastian Luft for pointing this out.
52. See Hua XIV 195.
53. On Husserl's use of the word 'Habe' and its etymological connection with 'habitus' see
Dorion Cairns, Conversations with Husserl and Fink, ed. Richard Zaner (The Hague: Nijhoff,
1976), p. 7.
54. See Edward Casey, 'The Ghost of Embodiment: On Bodily Habitudes and Schemata', in Donn
Welton, ed., Body and Flesh (Oxford: Blackwell, 2000), pp. 207-225.
55. Hua XIV 195.
56. See Hua VII 145.
57. E. Husserl, Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie.
Erstes Buch: Allgemeine Einführung in die reine Phänomenologie, 1. Halbband: Text der 1-
3. Auflage, hrsg. K. Schuhmann, Hua III/1 (The Hague: Nijfohh, 1977), trans. F. Kersten,
Ideas pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy, First
Book (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1983). Hereafter 'Ideas I', followed by the English pagination and
Hua volume number and pagination of German edition.
58. Ideas I p. xix; III/1 5; see also § 108. See also Phen. Psych. § 5 (Hua IX 55) where Husserl
speaks of the 'habits (Gewohnheiten) of natural scientific thinking'. He speaks of such
Denkgewohnheiten also at § 24 IX 142, where these scientific habits have been transferred to
psychology.
59. Ideas I § 33. By contrast, Ideas I mentions 'Habitus' only once at § 96; III/1 224, where
Husserl speaks in a positive sense of the phenomenological 'habit of inner freedom'.
60. Husserl, Phänomenologische Psychologie Vorlesungen Sommersemester 1925, ed. W. Biemel
(The Hague: Nijhoff, 1968), Hua IX 6; trans. J. Scanlon, Phenomenological Psychology.
Lectures, Summer Semester 1925 (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1977). Hereafter 'Phen. Psych.',
followed by pagination of English and then Husserliana edition.
61. Phen. Psych. IX 136; see also § 41 Hua IX 206, where he speaks of the 'ego as a pole of
activities and habitualities', Das Ich als Pol der Aktivitäten und Habitualitäten. Husserl speaks
positively of the 'personal subject of habits' (Hua IX 286). Similarly, in Crisis he speaks of
the specific "activity and habituality of the functioning ego" (Aktivität und Habitualität des
fungierenden Ich, Crisis VI 109); and of the "peculiarities of human life and human
habitualities" (Crisis VI 141n). Every ego has to be considered as an ego pole of acts and
habitualities (als Ichpol seiner Akte und Habitualitäten und Vermögen, Crisis VI, 187).
Husserl, Die Krisis der europäischen Wissenschaften und die transzendentale
Phänomenologie, ed. W. Biemel, Hua VI (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1962), trans. David Carr, The
Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology. An Introduction to
Phenomenological Philosophy (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1970). Hereafter
'Crisis', followed by the English page number and then the German page number.
62. Hua IX 278; 315.
63. See e.g. Crisis § 67.
64. Edmund Husserl, Cartesianische Meditationen und Pariser Vorträge, hrsg. Stephan Strasser,
Hua I (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1950), trans. D. Cairns, Cartesian Meditations (Dordrecht:
Kluwer, 1993). Hereafter 'CM' followed by pagination of English and then Hua edition.
74

65. See CM p. 66; Hua I 100.
66. Edmund Husserl, Erfahrung und Urteil, hrsg. Ludwig Landgrebe (Darmstadt: Meiner, 1999),
trans. J.S. Churchill and K. Ameriks, Experience and Judgment: Investigations in a Genealogy
of Logic, revised and Ed. L. Landgrebe (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1973),
especially § 12 and §§ 25-26. Hereafter 'EU', followed by English and German pagination.
67. Hua XIV 230.
68. See Hua XXIII 38.
69. CM § 32.
70. CM § 32, p. 67; Hua I 101.
71. Hua XIV 378, my translation. The German reads: Ich bin aber nicht <nur> aktuelles, sondern
auch habituelles Ich, und die Habitualität bezeichnet eine gewisse ichliche Möglichkeit, ein
„ich kann", „ich könnte", „ich hätte können", und das Können wieder sich verwirklichend
weist hin auf Ichaktualitäten, auf aktuelle Icherlebnisse, eben als Verwirk- lichungen des
Könnens. Mit einem Worte, ich bin (und ohne das wäre ich kein Ich, ich kann mich nicht
anders denken) ein Ich der Vermögen.
72. CM § 54.
73. Hua IV 277.
74. CM § 32, p. 67; Hua I 101.
75. Hua XIV 230: Jedes Individuum hat seine Gewohnheiten. Wie steht individuelle Gewohnheit
und bleibende Entschiedenheit (bleibende Urteile, Werte, Entschlüsse für das Individuum)?
Sitte ist ein Titel für sozial gewohnheitsmässige Handlungen, ebenso hat die Sprache ihre
sozial gewohnheitsmässige grammatische Form, und zu allem sozial Gewohnheitsmässigen
gehört ein Sollen, das des „Üblichen", des Normalen, sich Gehörenden. Aber Wissenschaft
und Kunst? Ist Sitte an sich schon Kultur? Sie kann in Kultur genommen werden, möchte
man sagen.
76. Hua XIII 244.
77. Hua XIV 172.
78. See Rudolf Bernet, 'Unconscious Consciousness in Husserl and Freud', in Donn Welton, ed.,
The New Husserl. A Critical Reader (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2003), pp. 199-
219.
79. See Nam-In Lee, Edmund Husserls Phänomenologie der Instinkte (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1993).
80. LU II § 34.
81. Ideas II §56, p. 236; IV 225
82. See Elmar Holenstein, Phänomenologie der Assoziation: Zu Struktur und Funktion eines
Grundprinzips der passiven Genesis bei E. Husserl (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1972).
83. CM § 39.
84. See Scheler, Formalism in Ethics, op. cit., pp. 417-19 and pp. 448-450.
85. See Husserl, Introduction to Logic and Theory of Knowledge (1906-1907), § 51, pp. 346-47;
Hua 350-351.
86. See Fania Oz-Salzberger, Translating the Enlightenment: Scottish Civic Discourse in
Eighteenth-Century Germany (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995), p. 164.
87. Hua VII 173; 179; 180.
88. Hua VII 151.
89. See Hua VII 354.
90. See Edmund Husserl, Analysen zur passiven Synthesis. Aus Vorlesungs- und
Forschungsmanuskripten (1918-1926), hrsg. M. Fleischer, Hua XI (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1988),
trans. Anthony Steinbock, Analyses Concerning Passive and Active Synthesis. Lectures on
Transcendental Logic, Husserl Collected Works Vol. IX (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 2001), hereafter
'APS' and pagination of English translation, followed by Hua volume and page number.
91. APS § 41, p. 240; XI 190.
92. See Hua IX 412.
93. Ideas II § 55, p. 229; IV 217
94. Ideas II § 55 (b), p. 233; Hua IV 222.
75

95. Ideas II, p. 234; Hua IV 222.
96. See Hua IV 223.
97. Hua XXIII 459.
98. Hua XV 367.
99. Max Scheler, on the other hand, took notice of Freud and Nietzsche right from the start in his
phenomenological analyses of moods, feelings and the affective life in general.
100. Experience and Judgment, § 25 p. 122; Erfahrung und Urteil, p. 137.
101. EU § 15.
102. EU § 17.
103. XIV 230 (1921/1922): Verflechtung des Einzel-Ich und seiner Positionalität in die
Gemeinschaft : Konstitution einer Gemeinschaftshabitualität, der Tradition, die immer schon
besteht mit dem Momente der Stiftung der Gemeinschaft, da sie selbst nur ist durch Stiftung
einer intersubjektiven Habitualität oder Tradition. Das Parallele natürlich für das Einzel-Ich,
es ist nur in fortgesetzter Stiftung von Habitualität (seine individuelle Tradition) und <hat>
also auch seinen wesensmässigen Anfang (schöpferischen Ansatzpunkt) in einer ersten
Stiftung, durch die es sich selbst als habituelles Ich stiftet.
104. Bourdieu, The Logic of Practice, op. cit., p. 56, p. 68, and p. 239.
105. Bourdieu, The Logic of Practice, op. cit., p. 73.
106. See XIV 183: ‚ Die Rasse rechnen wir hierher, sofern die Gemeinsamkeit des äußeren
physischen Habitus Hand in Hand geht mit derartigen Gemeinschafts charakteren'.
107. See Dieter Lohmar, 'Husserl's Type and Kant's Schemata: Systematic Reasons for their
Correlation or Identity', in Donn Welton, ed., The New Husserl, op. cit., pp. 93-124.
108. Ideas II 58, Hua IV 252: ‚Ich bin das Subjekt meines Lebens, und lebend entwickelt sich das
Subjekt; es erfährt primär nicht sich, sondern es konstituiert Naturgegenstände, Wertsachen,
Werkzeuge etc. Es bildet, gestaltet als aktives primär nicht sich, sondern Sachen zu Werken.
Das Ich ist ursprünglich nicht aus Erfahrung — im Sinne von assoziativer Apperzeption, in
der sich Einheiten von, Mannigfaltigkeiten des Zusammenhanges konstituieren, sondern aus
Leben (es ist, was es ist, nicht für das Ich, sondern selbst das Ich).'
109. Ideas § 60 c, pp. 281-282; Hua IV 269. These passages clearly show that Husserl was thinking
of habitus in the way in which it is developed by sociologists such as Elias and Bourdieu, as
well as identifying the das Man character that Heidegger discusses in Being and Time.
110. Jürgen Habermas, The Theory of Communicative Action, trans. Thomas McCarthy, 2 vols.
(Cambridge: Polity, 1984 and 1987), especially Volume Two, which is subtitled in English
'Lifeworld and System: A Critique of Functionalist Reason'.
111. See David M. Rasmussen, 'Lebenswelt: Reflections on Schutz and Habermas', Human
Studies, Vol. 7, No. 2, Schutz Special Issue (1984), pp. 127-132
112. See J. Habermas, On the Pragmatics of Communication, ed. and trans. Maeve Cooke
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998), p. 243. 
113. Jürgen Habermas, The Theory of Communicative Action, Volume Two (Boston: Beacon Press,
1987).
114. See, for instance, Experience and Judgment § 46 and § 93.
115. See especially Ideen II § 52 and § 59.
116. See Experience and Judgment, § 21.
117. See Ideas II, § 59.
118. See Cartesian Meditations, § 55.
119. Crisis § 9b, p. 31; VI 28. ‚Die Dinge der anschaulichen Umwelt (immer genommen so, wie
sie anschaulich in der Lebensalltägichkeit für uns da sind und uns als Wirklichkeiten gelten)
haben sozusagen ihre „Gewohnheiten", sich unter typisch ähnlichen Umständen ähnlich zu
verhalten. Nehmen wir die anschauliche Welt im Ganzen in der strömenden Jeweiligkeit, in
welcher sie für uns schlicht da ist, so hat sie auch als ganze ihre „Gewohnheit", nämlich sich
gewohnheitsmäßig so wie bisher fortzusetzen'.
120. Crisis, p. 345; Hua VI 358.
121. See Phen. Psych. § 14.
76

122. E. Husserl 'Philosophie als strenge Wissenschaft', originally Logos. Internationale Zeitschrift
für Philosophie und Kultur 1 (1910-1911), pp. 289-341, reprinted in Hua vol. XXV; trans.
M. Brainard, 'Philosophy as a Rigorous Science,' New Yearbook for Phenomenology and
Phenomenological Philosophy II (2002), pp. 249-295. Hereafter 'PRS' with English
pagination, followed by German pagination of original.
123. PRS p. 253/294; Hua XXV 8-9.
124. PRS p. 271/314; Hua XXV 31.
125. PRS p. 284/329; XXV 48.
126. Hua XXVIII 402.
127. Hua XIII 208.
128. See E. Husserl, The Basic Problems of Phenomenology from the Lectures, Winter Semester,
1910-1911, trans. Ingo Farin and James G. Hart (Dordrecht: Springer, 2006), p. 123; Hua
XIII 208: ‚Der Habitus der phänomenologischen Epoche ist ein thematischer Habitus, um
gewisse Themen, Wahrheitserkenntnisse, theoretische und praktische, zu gewinnen und ein
gewisses rein in sich geschlossenes Erkenntnissystem. Dieser thematische Habitus schliesst
zwar in gewisser Weise den der Positivität aus: nur in seiner Abgeschlossenheit gegen den
letzteren führt er zur abgeschlossenen Einheit einer Phänomenologie als der „Ersten"
Philosophie, als der Wissenschaft von der transzendental reinen Subjektivität'.
129. See Hua XIV 399: ‚Aber durch phänomenologische Reduktion setze ich die Welt außer
Geltung, nur mein Welterfahren, mein Weltglauben, -ausweisen, meine entsprechende
Habitualität usw. bleibt erhalten, eben als rein Subjektives'
130. See Crisis Hua VI 331.
131. See Hua XV 55.
132. Indeed, Bourdieu's articulation of habitus has been criticized as lacking theoretical rigour and
even for being a kind of deus ex machina invoked to solve certain problems.
133. EU § 12.
134. Crisis § 53.
135. See EU § 12.
77

