History of European Ideas
ISSN: 0191-6599 (Print) 1873-541X (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rhei20
Husserl's assistants: Phenomenology
reconstituted
Gabriel R. Ricci
To cite this article: Gabriel R. Ricci (2010) Husserl's assistants: Phenomenology reconstituted,
History of European Ideas, 36:4, 419-426, DOI: 10.1016/j.histeuroideas.2010.07.002
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.histeuroideas.2010.07.002
Published online: 03 Jan 2012.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 509
View related articles 
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rhei20

Husserl's assistants: Phenomenology reconstituted
Gabriel R. Ricci *
Philosophy/History, Elizabethtown College, One Alpha Drive, Elizabethtown, PA 17022, USA
Edmund Husserl's lectures on the phenomenology of the
consciousness of internal time from 1905 were subsequently
edited and published by his most famous student, Martin
Heidegger, in 1928. Thanks to the efforts of another assistant,
Edith Stein, Husserl's lectures remained sufﬁciently intact for
Heidegger's later editing and publication.1 Roman Ingarden,
another student of Husserl's from that era, has provided ﬁrst
hand information that without the help of Edith Stein, Husserl's
lectures and notes on internal time consciousness would not have
seen the light of day.2
Several years earlier Heidegger himself had scrambled to
assemble his own writings so that he could pass through an
academic mile stone. The text became Sein und Zeit (1927) which
catapulted him into notoriety. Heidegger's work contains an
analysis of time that unequivocally owes a debt to his mentor's
profound logical meditation on time. In 1933, Husserl was
dismissed from the University of Freiburg. Immediately following
the dismissal, Martin Heidegger, on whose behalf Husserl worked
to ﬁll his own academic chair, became the Rector of the university.
After converting to Christianity, losing a son on the front in the First
World War, pioneering in the ﬁeld of phenomenology, and
mentoring so many productive German academics Husserl was
rewarded by the new regime with banishment from the academy.
Heidegger subsequently delivered a famous speech at the
university in which he promoted the various ways in which the
academic community could serve the State. Although Heidegger
resigned from the position of Rector within a year of his
appointment, he remained in the Nazi party, because, as he later
said, he could best promote the interests of philosophy and his
mentor Edmund Husserl. Husserl died in 1938 and Heidegger did
not attend the services; he also allowed the editor to remove the
dedication to Husserl in the 1941 edition of Sein und Zeit. Karl
Popper famously denounced Heidegger for turning on his mentor
and advised everyone to abandon their study of Heidegger. Hannah
Arendt also had harsh words for her former teacher and lover. To
dismiss the work of Heidegger out of hand, however, is to neglect
the philosophical trail blazed by Husserl. The fate of Husserl's other
and less academically famous assistant, Edith Stein, was remark-
able for the religious turn that would culminate in canonization.
Husserl's writings on internal time consciousness provide
insights
into
his
corrections
to
Brentano's
and
Meinong's
psychological interpretation of time, but the history of the text's
redaction in the hands of Stein, Heidegger and even Ingarden
reveal an episode in which academic careers were fragile and
subject
to
capricious
and
dangerous
political
forces.
Stein
remained loyal to her teacher (she repeatedly refers to him as
the master in her correspondence) though she would give up her
assistantship out of frustration for his undisciplined approach to
his work. Ingarden was provided the opportunity to edit Husserl's
work on time consciousness, but Heidegger would eventually take
History of European Ideas 36 (2010) 419-426
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Article history:
Available online 3 August 2010
Keywords:
Time Consciousness
Phenomenology
European Academic History
Martin Heidegger
Edith Stein
Roman Ingarden
Edmund Husserl
A B S T R A C T
Edmund Husserl devoted much attention to the analysis of internal time consciousness beginning as
early as the turn of the twentieth-century. His various notes and lectures were left unorganized and
unpublished until Husserl's capable assistants were given the responsibility of organizing his work for
publication. This paper provides a social and philosophical account of the redaction of Husserl's
materials on time consciousness as it involved the activity of his famous assistants Edith Stein, Roman
Ingarden and Martin Heidegger. Special attention is given to the way that both Stein and Heidegger
appropriated Husserl's work and at the same time challenged fundamental elements of the master's
phenomenology.
 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
* Tel.: +1 7173611139.
E-mail address: riccigr@etown.edu.
1 See the introduction of the new translation by John Barnett Brough , On the
Phenomenology of the Consciousness of Internal Time (1893-1917) (Kluwer Academic
Press, 1991) for a history of Husserl's lectures on time and the primary role Edith
Stein played in preserving, organizing and editing the famous lectures. From
Brough's account, one comes away thinking that Heidegger's subsequent editing
and publication of the manuscripts was parasitic and exploitative. I have relied on
Brough's new translation of Husserl's manuscripts.
2 See Roman Ingarden's review of his correspondence with Stein, ''Edith Stein on
Her Activity as an Assistant of Edmund Husserl,'' Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research, vol. XXIII, No. 2 (December, 1962), 155-75.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
History of European Ideas
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/histeuroideas
0191-6599/$ - see front matter  2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.histeuroideas.2010.07.002

on the job. Husserl's manuscripts had been around at least since
the turn of the century and his 1905 lecture was well known to his
students. Though Heidegger's analysis of the temporal foundations
of Dasein in Sein und Zeit introduces a new philosophical
vocabulary and at ﬁrst purports to address a fundamental
ontology, he quickly establishes that an analysis of time is at
the center of such a study. In the end, his interpretation of
temporality subscribes to the fundamental elements of Husserl's
conception of internal time consciousness.
The success and failure Husserl had with his students and
prote´ge´s can be read in the history of the famous Jahrbuch fu˝r
Philosophie und pha¨nomenologische Forschung which Husserl began
with a group of early phenomenology enthusiasts in 1913. The
Jahrbuch was not a typical periodical. Organized to promote the
new school of phenomenology, the Jahrbuch would publish major,
substantial works of Husserl's followers and students. From its
inception until Husserl closed it down in 1933, the Jahrbuch would
routinely publish student dissertations, Habilitationschrift and the
massive works of the school's adherents. In volume V, Roman
Ingarden's dissertation on Henri Bergson, Intuition and Intellect in
Henri Bergson and Edith Stein's anticipated Habilitationschrift,
Contributiuons to the Philosophical Foundation of Psychology and the
Human Studies would appear. Martin Heidegger would publish a
work on Aristotle which anticipated Sein und Zeit in volume VIII,
and volume VIII contained the ﬁrst half of what would become the
manuscript Sein und Zeit in 1925.3
In 1925, Heidegger was appointed a co-editor of the Jahrbuch,
after which he was asked by Husserl to publish his motley notes
and lectures on internal time consciousness. Edith Stein had
already produced a composite text from the miscellaneous papers
she was given in 1916 and now Heidegger was to give them his
attention. Apparently, Heidegger paid little mind to what he was
doing and published an unﬁnished text. This did not go unnoticed
by Husserl or others in the phenomenological circle.4 Heidegger
saw much success with the publication of Sein und Zeit in Jahrbuch
VIII and Husserl had to feel pushed to the margins. Having laid the
groundwork for a logical investigation of the temporal foundations
for consciousness, Heidegger took his teacher's painstaking work
and attached it to more vibrant existential themes that resonated
with a wider audience. Roman Ingarden's correspondence reveals
not only the tension he saw brewing between Heidegger and
Husserl but how previously in 1916 all the important legwork for
Husserl's text on internal time consciousness had already been
done by Edith Stein. This inside information does not paint a
favorable portrait of Heidegger at the time.
Husserl's relationship with Heidegger had begun to sour long
before he asked Heidegger to edit his work on internal time
consciousness in 1928. The year before Roman Ingarden turned
down the opportunity to assist Husserl with this project, after
which Ingarden told Heidegger about the manuscript. This was the
manuscript that Edith Stein pledged herself to while she was
Husserl's assistant from 1916 to 1918. Stein was one of the ﬁrst
woman assistants in the German academy but by 1928 she had
learned how dim her prospects were in the male-dominated
institution. She had converted to Catholicism by this time and her
intellectual attention had turned to the philosophy of Thomas
Aquinas and the mysticism of Theresa of Avila.
Husserl had once thought that Heidegger's Catholicism would
undermine an open investigation of philosophy, but he could not
have foreseen the intellectual rivalry and vanity that would end
their collaboration. The tensions that had been building during the
1920s would become public in the open dispute over the
publication of an article on phenomenology for the 14th edition
of the Encyclopedia Britannica.
In letters to Karl Lo¨with and Karl Jaspers, Heidegger had already
expressed his distance from Husserl's approach to phenomenolo-
gy.5 In his letter to Jaspers, he implied that Husserl has even
become mentally unstable and that he simply gets by on his
reputation. In 1928 when the two collaborated on the writing of
the Britannica article it was clear to each that they did not agree on
the nature of phenomenology. Two years before, a faculty position
was in the balance for Heidegger and he had come up short with
publications. With Husserl's help arrangements were made with
the publisher Max Niemeyer and Heidegger secured his post at
Marburg. Husserl's subsequent readings of Heidegger's text would
put an end to any future collaboration. Husserl found Sein und Zeit
burdened with a fabricated language and at times pseudo-
scientiﬁc. By this time Heidegger made it known in his lectures
that he questioned the legitimacy of Husserl's stature as the
reigning philosopher of phenomenology. Husserl would respond in
kind in public lectures that attacked Heidegger for establishing the
foundation for philosophy in concrete existence; missing the point
of the transcendental reduction.
Heidegger's appeal to the real world, and his analysis of human
existence that is primordially enmeshed in the world, found an
audience in the university. In 1933 he made his feelings toward
Husserl perfectly clear. In his infamous Rektoratsrede at the
University of Freiburg, Heidegger pledged his allegiance to the Nazi
regime and enumerated the various ways that the university could
serve the cause of the Third Reich.6 Husserl died in 1938 and
Heidegger made no effort to attend the funeral.
Later in his life Heidegger made it clear that he harbored ill will
toward that man that supported his academic ambitions. Likewise,
writings after the war that contained an anti-American, anti-
materialistic and anti-technological spirit provided evidence that
he had not wholeheartedly abandoned the ideas that ﬁrst drew
him to Nazism. Husserl had uncovered evidence of Heidegger's
anti-Semitism but what disturbed him most were Heidegger's
abandonment of his phenomenological method and the primacy of
the conceptualizing and intentional mind. After Husserl's reading
of Sein und Zeit in 1929 there could be no doubt that his prote´ge´'s
philosophy was grounded in the practical outlook that arises
spontaneously with consciousness and is summed up in Heideg-
ger's use of the term Care. This must have disturbed Husserl
3 See Karl Schumann, ''Husserl's Yearbook,'' Philosophical and Phenomenological
Research, vol. 50, Supplement (Autumn, 1990), 1-25 which provides a detailed
history of the Jahrbuch and its key participants. Schumann addresses some of the
internal problems with this publication and the suspicions Husserl's had about
some of his colleagues. Heidegger was named a co-editor in 1925 but soon after
Husserl grows frustrated with Heidegger's treatment of one of his texts and the fact
that Heidegger did not satisfactorily acknowledge his debt to him.
4 Schumann, ftn. 92, 20.
5 Edmund Husserl, Psychological and Transcendental Phenomenology and the
Confrontation with Heidegger (1927-1931), translated and edited by Thomas
Sheehan and Richard E. Palmer (Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1997), 17. The
correspondence is from 1922-23.
6 There have been several attempts to link Heidegger's philosophy in Sein und Zeit
to Nazi ideology. Viktor Farias's work in the late 1980s paints such a picture and
more recently Emmanuel Faye resuscitated the effort. Some have argued that
Heidegger's roots go even deeper. Michael Allen Gillespie's article ''Martin
Heidegger's Aristotelian National Socialism,'' Political Theory, vol. 28 No. 2 (April
2000), 140-66 makes such a case. Gillespie ﬁnds elements of Nazism in Heidegger's
early appropriation of Aristotle's concept of phronesis and in Heidegger's use of
Dilthey's historicism, which provide Heidegger with an interpretation of the 'I'
within a particular historical context and thus a concern for the key Aristotelian
concept of praxis, 144. Gillespie traces Heidegger's reading of Aristotle to Franz
Brentano's On the Maniford Meaning of Being in Aristotle (1862), 145. Efforts like
Gillespie's tend to contaminate philosophical ideas that are best understood within
their own historical contexts. To understand how Heidegger's vanity and
ruthlessness may have culminated in his turn to Nazism might be better
understood through an examination of his machinations within the academy.
Heidegger's texts are not the real source of the blind ambition that would use Nazi
ideology for academic advancement.
G.R. Ricci / History of European Ideas 36 (2010) 419-426
420

immensely, but he had made a point of introducing his students to
the work of Wilhelm Dilthey who had publicly disagreed with
Husserl on the foundation of philosophy.
In an article titled ''Philosophie als strenge Wissenschaft''
published in the ﬁrst volume of Logos, Husserl implied that Dilthey
missed the point of rigorous philosophy because it seemed as if he
was deriving philosophy from the empirical study of history.7
Husserl
and
Dilthey
had
been
engaged
in
resolving
their
philosophical differences since 1905 when Dilthey invited Husserl
to Berlin. In the end there could be no reconciliation, since Dilthey
maintained the methodological distinction between the Geistesw-
sisenschaften
and
the
Naturwissenschaften
and
Husserl
was
steadfast in his faith in the pure transcendental ego, capable of
synthesizing all knowledge under one system. A constant sticking
point was Dilthey's insistence that Husserl did not understand the
critical difference between historical empiricism and historical
consciousness. As a follower of Brentano's ''psychological scholas-
ticism,'' Dilthey accused Husserl of manufacturing unnecessary
abstract entities and ignoring the given continuities of psychic
life.8 Edith Stein would discover one of these psychic connections
in Dilthey's use of the idea of Einfu¨hlung. In fact, her dissertation
was devoted to the subject. Stein wrote her dissertation after
serving as a nurse in the war but Dilthey intellectually grounded
her Zum Problem der Einfu˝hlung (1916).
Heidegger's philosophical enterprise at the time was dedicated
to producing an alternative to the epistemological subject/object
relationship that had dominated the western tradition. Heidegger
found it in the idea of Care, which embodies Husserl's insights on
time, but which focuses consciousness onto a world that demands
practical involvement. There is clear evidence that Heidegger's
idiosyncratic use of the concept of Care derives from literary
sources and that he was in accord with Dilthey foundational
conception of historical consciousness.9 Two of Husserl's most
famous students, then, leaned toward Dilthey's understanding of
Erlebnis and Nacherleben,10 and disclosed an immediate experience
with either the living body or an empathic connection with the
other. This view is closer to Dilthey's analysis of the psychic nexus,
than it is to Husserl's pure ego which has a tendency to ﬁrst remove
the life from its ﬁeld of perception after which it is artiﬁcially
added later. The last chapter of Stein's dissertation, ''Empathy as
the Understanding of Spiritual Persons,'' contains more of the spirit
of Dilthey's Geisteswissenschaften than it does Husserl's design for a
transcendental system for all knowledge, as we will see.
Heidegger's critique of Husserl's phenomenology is recorded in
their failed collaboration of the Encyclopedia Britannica article on
phenomenology which would eventually appear under Husserl's
name. The philosophical disagreements between Heidegger and
Husserl have been closely examined in Steven Galt Crowell's
''Husserl, Heidegger and Transcendental Philosophy: Another Look
at
the
Encyclopedia
Britannica
Article.''11
There
was
close
collaboration between the two and a correspondence which
follows the course of their disputes. By this time Heidegger had
published Sein und Zeit and Husserl had given a critical review.
Husserl was then aware of the way in which Heidegger had
appropriated his meditation on time consciousness and how
Heidegger was primarily concerned with the ontological status of
the transcendental subject. The dispute that Crowell chronicles
shows that the pair did not disagree on the importance of the
transcendental reduction, but on the character of the ego at the
center of the ﬁeld of reﬂection. Husserl perceived this ego as a pure,
epistemological entity prepared to bracket off the world from
which it was derived. Heidegger, on the other hand, had shown
over and over again in Sein und Zeit that the ego (Dasein) he
discovered was one in which a world was constituted.
This conclusion is summed up in Heidegger's qualiﬁcation of the
ontical status of Dasein as ontological and thus predisposed to
address the question of being. Husserl had to regard such a
conclusion as a deviation from the pure epistemological ego of the
transcendental reduction. Heidegger's conclusions reveal an earlier
allegiance to the questions of being that he uncovered in Aristotle's
work, though Husserl could not have read it as anything but a
rebuke. The whole of Sein und Zeit is devoted to the clariﬁcation of an
ego predisposed by temporality and an environment (Umwelt)
which deﬁes the Cartesian ego that is established on the grounds of
denying that a world exists, that even the 'I' from which thinking
begins is also a momentary chimera. Descartes never provided
detailed instructions on how to reconstitute a world; Heidegger
solved the problem by building in a world to the being of Dasein.
Heidegger's falling out with Husserl at the time of the
Britannica article was provoked by a philosophical disagreement
but the backbiting that is revealed in their correspondence to
others could not have helped. By this time Heidegger had assumed
the chair left vacant by his mentor, Heinrich Rickert, who was a
fervent proponent of neo-Kantianism. Unlike Ingarden and Stein,
Heidegger did not write his dissertation under Husserl. All of
Husserl's earlier reservations about Heidegger's sincerity and
loyalty must have come crashing down on him.
Emmanuel Levinas, who would introduce Husserl to the French,
visited Husserl in the critical year of the collaboration on the
Britannica article. Levinas brieﬂy studied under Husserl, met
Heidegger, and his dissertation, The Theory of Intuition in Husserl's
Phenomenology, obviously reﬂects his deep attraction to phenom-
enology and Husserl. Levinas's philosophical trajectory took on a
profoundly moral engagement, but early in his career inﬂuences
from both Husserl and Heidegger were unmistakable. He would
later admit to coming under the inﬂuence of the historical
elements in Heidegger's brand of phenomenology, thus generating
an interest in immediate practical problems. He was certainly in an
interesting position to comment on the deteriorating relationship
between his two early inﬂuences. At the time he could see that
Heidegger appropriated Husserl's work, while at the same time
introducing the ontological orientation that had been latent since
his early involvement with Aristotle. Levinas's personal view of
Heidegger would change after Heidegger's exaltation of Nazi ideals
but it would not come as soon as Martin Buber's denunciation in
the late thirties. Levinas spent difﬁcult years in a labor camp during
WWII, and lost much of his family in Lithuania, so it is remarkable
that he did not repudiate him sooner than he did.
Heidegger's early literary efforts were also supported by others
who knew of his reputation as a charismatic teacher. The founders
of the interdisciplinary journal, Deutsche Vierteljahrschrift fu¨r
Literaturwissenschaft und Geistesgeschichte, Paul Kluckhohn and
Erich Rothacker conducted a campaign to attract Heidegger to their
journal. Eventually he would publish the gathering fragments of
what would become Sein und Zeit.12 In these critical years, when
7 Rudolf A. Makkreel, Dilthey Philosopher of the Human Studies (Princeton
University Press, 1975), 276.
8 Makkreel, 279.
9 See chapter IV in this volume titled ''The Literary Sources for Heidegger's
Concept of Care'' which traces the lineage of the idea to Goethe and classical
sources.
10 Dilthey's conception of Nacherleben contains empathic elements and is the basic
mechanism for understanding an historical reality that has transpired and requires
a form of reconstruction or a reliving in order to understand it.
11 The article appears in Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, vol. 50, No. 3
(March, 1990), 501-18.
12 Theodore Kisiel's article ''Why the First Draft of Being and Time Was Never
Published'' Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology, vol. 20, No. 1 (January
1989), 3-22 examines the correspondence between Heidegger and the new editors.
The letters reveal Heidegger's reservations and the kind of information and research
that was presented to Heidegger in order to entice him.
G.R. Ricci / History of European Ideas 36 (2010) 419-426
421

Heidegger's literary output did not recommend him for a more
advanced position in the academy, he was introduced to two
important pieces of research that would later be incorporated into
the ﬁnal version of Sein und Zeit. The lead article of the inaugural
issue of new literary and intellectual history journal was Konrad's
Burdach's ''Faust und die Sorge'' which plays a rather prominent
role in Sein und Zeit, though it is given but a footnote.13 Heidegger
builds his pivotal notion of Care on the material he uncovered in
Burdach's article, which derives from classical literary sources.14
Equally, Heidegger was provided with important information on
the Dilthey-Yorck correspondence which would ﬁnd its way into
Heidegger's discussion of historicity in the ﬁnal version of Sein und
Zeit.
Heidegger commented on the Dilthey craze at the time and how
he was certain that he saw something in Dilthey that was
overlooked by others. His analysis of the correspondence in Sein
und Zeit shows that he thought Yorck's interpretation of historicity
was superior to Dilthey's. Heidegger's discussion in Section IV,  77
in Sein und Zeit favors Yorck's view of historicity since it derives
from the being of Dasein rather than from the objects of historical
study, as with those he identiﬁed as mere antiquarians and
ocularists, like Ranke et al. At the time Dilthey had published more
on the subject of historical consciousness than Yorck and Dilthey
had made his views on the foundational role of historical
consciousness in a debate with Husserl.
Heidegger's teacher, Heinrich Rickert, would also submit an
article for review in 1925 on Faust titled ''Fausts Tod und
Verkla¨rung.'' This connection in the early years of this journal
would obviously provide Heidegger with substance for a work that
would become his magnus opus. Sein und Zeit is an innovative
work, not because it introduced new ideas, but because it discussed
old (Aristotle) and current (Dilthey, Husserl) thinking with a new
and exotic vocabulary.
The publication drought that would attract attention in the year
Heidegger's name was put forward for a post at Marburg might also
be explained by the early reviews of his work for Rothacker's
literary journal. Everyone who encountered Heidegger's prose at
the time recognized that his struggle to ﬁnd the right language for
his phenomenological account of being was apparent in the
''tortured quality'' of his writing.15 These early reports correspond
to Husserl's later criticism of Heidegger's completed text of Sein
und Zeit. This ﬁnal text is a culmination and appropriation of many
of the inﬂuences to which Heidegger was exposed in the beginning
years of the Rothacker's promising journal. Both Karl Jaspers and
Georg Misch, the son-in-law of Wilhelm Dilthey, were put off by
Heidegger's complicated prose. In the end, Heidegger's magnus
opus
was
a
distillation
of
the
philosophical
inﬂuences
he
appropriated along the way. Without Husserl's manuscripts on
internal time consciousness, Heidegger would not have provided
the intellectual world with such a poignant interpretation on the
temporality of consciousness.
Husserl's early work on time consciousness begins with an
analysis and critique of Franz Brentano's psychological investiga-
tion of time. First drawn to mathematics, Husserl soon turned his
attention to the psychological investigations of Brentano at the
University of Vienna. Husserl's lectures on time consciousness
from 1903 to 1905 begin with Brentano's explanation for the origin
of time. Though Husserl would correct what he perceived as a
conﬂation of subjective and objective time in Brentano's work, he
begins his own analysis with a nod to Brentano's innovative idea of
''original association'' which refers to the manner in which a
representation of memory, without any cognitive or voluntary
effort of any kind, attaches itself to an actual present representa-
tion, thus producing a sense of temporal continuity.16 Very soon
into his meditation on time, Husserl introduces a musical analogy
similar to the one that appears in Bergson's reading of duration and
time consciousness—the idea of a melody.
The auditory model was also part of Wilhelm Wundt's
psychological investigations on perception and the sensation of
time intervals. William James dismissed Wundt's experimental
methods and his preoccupation with laboratory work as ''brass
instrument psychology,'' but Husserl would enhance the model of
music and a melody in his inquiry. Besides the inﬂuence of
Brentano and the experimental psychologists, like Wundt, Husserl
acknowledged the inﬂuence from the Urtext on time conscious-
ness, Augustine's Confessions, complete with its own musical
model to explain the origin of time consciousness.17
Augustine's
heady
meditation
remains
the
standard
for
measuring time and understanding the paradoxes that confront
anyone curious about the nature of time; whether it really exists
and precisely what is being measured when we customarily reckon
with time. Augustine, like the nineteenth-century experimental
psychologists and the phenomenologist, resorted to an auditory
analogy to conceptualize how time can be measured as it passes,
beginning with a simple noise emitted by a material object, moving
to an enunciation of the line Deus Creator omnium, and advancing
to the recitation of a psalm.18 In each instance Augustine was
concerned with how the moments of expectation, memory and
attention to an utterance in the present transition from one to the
other to ultimately be absorbed into a totality comprised equally of
the facets of time. The extension determined by the interaction of
the facets of time, since Augustine, also demonstrates how the
chimerical and ephemeral nature of the future, the past and the
durationless present, collapses into an interior attentiveness of the
mind. Augustine's meditation is the source of the metaphysical
construal of time in Husserl, Bergson and Heidegger. Like his
twentieth-century exponents, Augustine recognized that what is
measured when we reckon with time is not anything in the
material realm, a sound, a note, a melody that can be physically
monitored with scientiﬁc apparatus, but an impression that
remains after something objective has been consigned to memory
or the past that clearly does not exist anywhere but in the mind.
Still, whether it was the early Church Father imagining God's
primordial utterance of the Word to be eternal, or the experimental
psychologist measuring the perception of an interval, or the
phenomenologist analyzing the commingling of the aspects of the
time, they all struck the same note when they singled out the
inherent temporal quality of music and sound. In Husserl's case,
Edith Stein was responsible for assembling his disparate notes on
internal time consciousness into a coherent text.
In 1962, Roman Ingarden came to the defense of Edith Stein,
who had been accused by Henri Dussort for profoundly altering
and distorting Husserl's entire thought.19 In her duties as an
assistant to Husserl, she had been given the responsibility of
organizing Husserl's random papers into a coherent form for
publication. Ingarden was well aware of these responsibilities and
provides evidence from his lengthy correspondence with Stein that
not only did Husserl expressly deﬁne her task of making sense of
his writings, but that she also had difﬁculties getting Husserl to
13 Kisiel, 6.
14 See the chapter IV in this volume on ''The Literary Sources of Heidegger's
Concept of Care.''
15 Kisiel notes Georg Misch's critique of Heidegger's style as did Karl Jaspers who
found it lacklustered, 19.
16 Brough, 11.
17 Brough, 3.
18 Augustine, Confessions, translated by R.S. Pine-Cofﬁn (Penguin Books, 1987), XI,
27.
19 Ingarden, 156. Ingarden quotes an obituary on Henri Dussort from the Re´vue
Philosophique (1960), No. 4, 571 by Professor P.M. Schul. Dussort had worked on
Husserl's manuscripts at Louvain.
G.R. Ricci / History of European Ideas 36 (2010) 419-426
422

review her work. The assessment of her work by Dussort indicated
that Husserl had reprimanded Stein for taking such a freehand with
his work. This is not the record one uncovers in reading Stein's
letters to Ingarden in 1917 and 1918.
Ingarden's correspondence with Stein lasted from their early
years as Husserl's students until 1939, by which time she had
converted to Catholicism and joined the Carmelite Order. It was not
until after the war that he learned of her death at Auschwitz in
1942, following punitive action against all Jews residing in the
Netherlands at the time. The critical letters from 1917 to 1918, that
are contained in Ingarden's article, explain what authority Stein
had and the conscientiousness that she brought to her work. Stein
had, in fact, been given the responsibility of an editor. This was the
same responsibility that Husserl would give to future assistants, L.
Landgrebe and E. Fink, and Ingarden himself. Ingarden regrets
turning down the opportunity to review and edit manuscripts
Husserl wrote on time consciousness at Brenau; he knew that
Husserl on his own was not capable of organizing his own work.
At the time of their correspondence, Stein repeatedly told
Ingarden that her work on Husserl's Ideen was frustrated by the
Master's inattentiveness. Apparently, as Stein described her
mentor, Husserl was so quickly onto the next thought or the next
resolution of a problem that he had no time to waste putting
manuscripts in order. If there was a mismanagement of Husserl's
manuscripts, Ingarden points the ﬁnger at Husserl. Stein picked up
on Husserl's frustration with his Ideen manuscript, but it was also
aware that Husserl was intent on responding to Bergson's time
philosophy which he had confronted for the ﬁrst time.20
Husserl's creative output cannot be measured by his publica-
tions alone. From the vantage point of being an assistant, Ingarden
notes, one could see how immersed Husserl was in progressively
clarifying his thinking. Landgrebe, who served as an assistant in the
thirties, had compiled a list of the various manuscripts on which
Husserl had been working. His students were in the best position to
see that the depth and range of his productivity meant that he
could never singlehandedly manage his own research or bring
everything to publication.21 Ingarden's correspondence with Stein
tells the story of Stein's disappointment with her mentor's style.
Before she gave up her assistantship out of frustration, however,
she spent much time on organizing the Vorlesungen zur Phaeno-
menologie des inneren Zeitbewusstsein.
Stein's correspondence also reveals a mentor who was so
caught up in his own reﬂection that he had little time to provide
constructive feedback for his students. In a letter dated January 5,
1917, Stein reports on Husserl's plans for a future issue of his
Jahrbuch, but that both their dissertations still lie on the windowsill
where Husserl had placed them earlier. In the same letter we also
hear Stein express her determination to unify Husserl's texts
independent of the Master's changeable fancies (unabha¨ngig von
den wechselden Einfa¨llen des lieben Meisters). Stein even tells
Ingarden that she is conﬁdent that clearing up some ambiguous
points are within her philosophical ability.22 Her letter expresses
some reservations about her ability, but she was emphatic about
independently unifying the manuscripts she was working on. A
letter two weeks letter to Ingarden also indicates that she proceeds
on her on authority.23
Stein's letters to Ingarden also reveal a fundamental disagree-
ment with Husserl's phenomenology. A letter from February 20,
1917, tells how Stein confronted Husserl on her reservations with
Husserl's idealism.24 In addition to being privileged to the
ambiguity of some of Husserl's manuscripts, Stein was also taking
issue with Husserl's fundamental thought. Stein's argument also
shows up in a letter from home dated March 20, 1917, in which she
admits to closely examining a point on which she disagrees with
the Master, i.e., the necessity for a body (Leib) for empathy.25 While
the exchanges Stein had with Husserl suggest that there were real
debates between the two, Stein's letters suggest that Husserl never
had time to review her editing of his manuscripts or her own
work.26 Apparently Husserl made no effort to comment on her
dissertation, Zum Problem der Einfu¨hlung, before it was published in
Halle. In spite of her obvious frustration and the fact that she had
no time for her own work anymore, she remained ever supportive
of the Master. Whatever he might pen, she thought, is far more
worthy for publication than anything that she herself could
present to the world.27
Stein's letter dated July 6, 1917, which reports on the famous
manuscript on internal time consciousness is also important since
Stein's brief commentary on the importance of these manuscripts
to the idea of Constitution, referring to the conception of the 'I' in
Husserlian phenomenology. Alaisdair MacIntyre was also drawn to
Stein's comments, thanks to the research of Marianne Sawicki who
has uncovered Stein's inﬂuence on Husserl. As her correspondence
to Ingarden reveals, there was an opportunity for Edith Stein to
hash out differences with her mentor; Sawicki ﬁnds good reason to
credit Stein with some inﬂuence over Husserl.28 Stein's correspon-
dence with Ingarden reports that at times in which Stein raised
philosophical questions which Husserl's manuscripts generated,
Husserl would take Stein aside for long talks. As a student Stein had
to feel that her teacher was offering instruction, but it may have
been the teacher who was getting the most out of these
conversations. Ever since Stein was introduced to Husserlian
phenomenology through Aldolf Reinach's lectures in 1913, there
was in place a circle of students and professors dedicated to
promulgating phenomenology.29 Husserl was at the center but
given the number of creative followers, phenomenology was
destined to continual reﬁnement. In the hands of Edith Stein,
phenomenology became embodied in the empathic personality
and her mentor was made aware of this corrective measure.
The
dissertation
that
remained
on
Husserl's
windowsill
employed the Master's phenomenological treatment of time to
illustrate the mechanism of empathy, but ends with a nod to
Dilthey's understanding of lived experience and the reality of
internal and immediate psychic connections with the other and the
external world. In between, Stein tried to establish that the pure I
of phenomenology was attached to and continuous with other
egos, without which the epistemological self was void. In a manner
20 Ingarden, 159. ftn. 6.
21 Ingarden, 160.
22 Ingarden, 162.
23 Ingarden, The letter is dated January 18, 1917, and begins with a personal
reference to marriage prospects that must be compatible with her work on
Husserl's Ideen.
24 Ingarden, 166, letter, IX.
25 Ingarden, 168, letter, XII. The idea that Stein insisted on the Notwendigkeit eines
Leibes fu¨r die EInfuhlung is fundamentally opposed to the pure Ego of the
transcendental reduction in Husserl's phenomenology. This was a criticism that
would be shared by Heidegger, Husserl's most infamous student.
26 Ingarden, 169, letter, XVII.
27 Ingarden, 170, letter, XVII.
28 See Alaisdair MacIntyre's Edith Stein, A Philosophical Prologue 1913-1922
(Rowman and Littleﬁeld, 2006), 100. MacIntyre thanks Sawicki for clarifying the
role that Stein had on Husserl's clariﬁcation of his own thinking. MacIntyre refers to
a paper titled ''Making Up Husserl's Mind About Constitution'' from a philosophy
conference and her book Body, Text and Science: The Literacy of Investigative Practice
and the Phenomenology of Edith Stein (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1997). Sawicki also has a
lecture posted in the Hesburgh Libraries at the University of Notre Dame titled
''Personal Connections: The Phenomenology of Edith Stein'' which also describes
the way in which Stein deepened Husserl's view of what is constituted when an
object is intended by consciousness.
29 Husserl would support Reinach's Habilitation and he would later work with
Husserl on revisions of Logical Investigations and also helped establish the Jahrbuch.
Reinach remained loyal to Husserl's phenomenology but his career was cut short at
Flanders in 1917.
G.R. Ricci / History of European Ideas 36 (2010) 419-426
423

of speaking, Stein transformed the epistemological ego into an
embodied self, rich with connections to immediate lived experi-
ences which were in turn continuous with indirect experiences of
others. These indirect connections with others were explained
using the analogy of personal memory through which we become
aware of experiences that are no longer immediate or primordial,
as she put it.
Stein's essay on empathy is a peculiar combination of praise for
the groundbreaking work of her mentor and other illustrious
academics and a bold critique of even more famous thinkers like
Ranke, Burckhardt and Dilthey for coming up short or being
unclear about their ideas. Stein acknowledges that her under-
standing of phenomenology begins with her reading of Husserl's
Ideen I. Her discussion of empathy, which is a way of explaining
how a foreign object can become an experience of consciousness,
was within the phenomenological tradition (and general philo-
sophical tradition) of explaining the conditions for the possibility
of knowledge. The choice of the term empathy lends not only a
distinct psychological overlay but the entailment of another. Both
of these strategies signal a departure from Husserl's pure
epistemological ego. The operation of empathy will involve a
temporal framework and a stream of consciousness which are in
large measure taken from Husserl. Stein's conclusions are probably
representative of her discussions with Husserl on the pivotal
problem of constitution which she alludes to in her letter to
Ingarden dated July 6. 1917. The problem of constitution should
disclose the manner in which psychic connections present an
object of experience to consciousness.
Stein's solution to the problem of constitution turns on the
mechanism of empathy in which one can have a primordial
experience, in the present, of a non-primordial, foreign experience.
Stein illustrates this mechanism with a temporal analogy. In the
same way that we can have an experience in the now of a past
memory which is not present to us in the same immediate way, so
too can the joy or sadness of another become the intentional object
of the ''I.'' 30
The process of expectation takes on the same form as memory;
in both cases a continuous stream is projected backwards or
forwards to incorporate a non-primordial or a distant experience.
What Stein has established is that the innate ability to extend
ourselves into the past and into the future is the source of the
empathic mechanism which assimilates foreign objects or selves
external to our consciousness. In each case content which is not
immediate to the subject becomes a part of consciousness. This is
the same process, which Stein refers to in a letter to Fritz
Kaufmann, by which an experience of a momentary now achieves
duration.31 The temporal reality to which the now is attached has
transpired, but at the same time it makes the ever-present now a
reality. The transitory facets of time achieve existence only
through mutual realization; in the same way that self-conscious-
ness is realized through what is ichfremd or foreign to the ''I.''
Empathy was Stein's solution or explanation for the problem of
constitution because it explains how something remote from
consciousness can become an object of consciousness. The process
Stein outlined clearly involves a psycho-physical unity of mind and
body which placed her in opposition to Husserl who demanded
that the epistemological ego bracket off the external world. As in
the case of Martin Heidegger, Stein's phenomenological world was
one in which you discover that you are spontaneously alongside
the other; not in a primordial way, but certainly in a way that
enlivens consciousness.
The experience of empathy was not a mere perception but a
lived experience in which the living body (Leib) becomes an
instrument of the ''I's'' volition.32 Stein thought that she was
providing the foundation for inter-subjectivity as the condition for
the possibility of knowing the world in the ﬁrst place, as expressed
by Husserl, but she went beyond what it meant to understand
causality and meaning in the natural world. Stein came closer to
Dilthey's hermeneutic vision when she employed the temporal
features of self-consciousness as the ground for epistemology.33
Stein's analysis of empathy provides insight into how understand-
ing the products of culture and the spirit subsumed under the
Geisteswissenschaften requires probing the depths of self-con-
sciousness and reliving history; what she referred to as a sort of
reiterated empathy. For all the disagreements that Husserl might
have had with his student, they would not be the reason why he
would not support her Habilitation and her job prospects at
Go¨ttingen. For Husserl the fact that Edith Stein was a woman
disqualiﬁed her from the academy.
When Sein und Zeit was ﬁnally published in 1927, it had already
seen numerous manifestations. Since the ﬁnal text had received
intellectual and psychological support from so many sources, the
ﬁnal product can be seen as a collaborative work. Heidegger wrote
the text in his inimitable neologistic prose, but the work was
buoyed up by support from Husserl and others in the academy who
wanted Heidegger to succeed. Heidegger was exposed to so many
critical sources provided to him by Rothacker's literary journal that
Heidegger cannot be said to have independently produced his most
famous work.
Both Husserl and Heidegger agreed that time is foundational to
human existence. How temporality is fundamental to being human
will separate their meditations on time. To a certain extent, both
Husserl and Heidegger were reviving and correcting Kant's
transcendental unity of apperception in which time held a
constitutive role.34 Kant famously established that the manifold
of existence is temporally ordered thanks to an a priori temporal
intuition. Kant, however, did not go as far as to say that
consciousness was fundamentally temporal, the unity of con-
sciousness involved the intuition of space and various other
categories which in the end produced a conceptual unity of
consciousness. Kant's pure transcendental subject was non-
temporal and prior to its temporal intuition. Husserl would found
the unity of consciousness on temporality, since, as he uncovered,
the facets of time are integrated through a triadic intentionality
that at once calls each facet of time into existence. The inherent
temporality of objects in any ﬁeld of awareness led Husserl to the
underlying temporal mechanism which became the real source of
his investigation of time consciousness. Husserl found an absolute
continuity in the ﬂow of temporal consciousness which explained
the continuity we perceive in experience. Heidegger would
discover a similar temporal continuity but, in contrast to his
mentor, the unity was synonymous with existence itself. As such
Heidegger's temporal unity would take in a world, an environment
that could not be meaningfully disconnected from consciousness
per se. Like Stein before him, Heidegger's philosophy revised and
reconstituted Husserl's phenomenology.
Husserl's philosophical solution to the perception of temporal
connections and continuity in the empirical world was an
30 Edith Stein, On the Problem of Empathy, translated by Waltraut Stein (ICS
Publication, 1989), 7-8.
31 Letter 29a from Breslau dated October 3, 1919 in Self Portrait in Letters 1916-
1942, translated by Josephine Koeppel, O.C.D. (Washington D.C., 1993). Kaufmann
had just reviewed Stein's article Beitra¨ge zur philosophischen Begru¨ndung der
Psychologie und der Geisteswissenschaften which was published in Husserl's
Jahrbuch, vol. V, 1922.
32 Stein, 57.
33 Stein, 95.
34 The connections and differences among Kant, Husserl and Heidegger are
explored in Ronald P. Morrison's article ''Kant, Husserl, and Heidegger on time and
the Unity of 'Consciousness''' in Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, vol. 39,
No. 2 (December, 1978), 182-98.
G.R. Ricci / History of European Ideas 36 (2010) 419-426
424

underlying temporally formed transcendental unity. The way in
which Husserl described this unity foreshadowed Heidegger's
depiction of Dasein as a kind of stretching along that derived from
resolute anticipation. When Husserl illuminated the source of time
consciousness, he detached the empirical world, which is the
origin of impressions and sense data, from the internal temporal
schemata. Still, behind the source of the temporal determination of
reality was a kind Urgrund of internal time consciousness which is
not experienced in the same way that a temporal object of
consciousness can be experienced. The experience of an object in
time consciousness is described by Husserl in terms of a stretching
along or continuity that originates in a now, which quickly
subsides
into
a
retention
of
the
now
and
simultaneously
anticipates a future form of the now as a protention. This dynamic
of retention-the now-protention is illustrated in the example of the
melody or sound that both Husserl and Augustine used. The fact
that a note can remain the same in our consciousness though it is
modiﬁed as it recedes into the immediate past and approaches a
limit in an immediate future demonstrates not just the temporal
continuity of an object but of consciousness itself. Consciousness
grasps this continuity in an intentional assertion of the implicit
facets of time which constitute not just the experience but
consciousness of the experience. Husserl's transcendental reduc-
tion begins with a simple awareness of a now that progressively
reveals its past and future sides. Heidegger's analysis of time
consciousness did not begin in the now but in the future, since he
recognized that human existence is attached to a world with which
it is spontaneously concerned. The concern reveals itself in the
poignant mood of anxiety (about the future).
Heidegger's temporal analytic was not restricted to conscious-
ness; Heidegger maintained that existence itself was temporally
grounded. Thus Heidegger produced a temporal landscape and
vocabulary to describe an environment which could not be
detached from consciousness. Heidegger would employ the term
Dasein to delineate between the entities in the world that were
either simply alongside us or at our disposal like tools and
instruments, for which Heidegger used the expressions zuhanden
and vorhanden. Heidegger would also use the expression the
temporalizing of temporality to designate the special way in which
Dasein is actively grounded in time, as if it were an operation that
immediately summoned or integrated the facets of time. This
scheme followed Husserl's except Heidegger privileged the future,
not the now with its concomitant sense impression. Heidegger
proceeded from Dasein being thrown into a world which is made
explicit in the Da or the there. As a project, so to speak, Dasein
immediately entails possibility since it is always ahead of itself.
Heidegger dramatized this point for death is automatically
attached to being thrown into the world; Sein zum Tode, as he
put it. Authentically facing this ultimate possibility is to potentially
embrace all possibilities. As in the case of Husserl's mirrored
protention, Heidegger's futural state comes with a having been.
This horizon which connects the past and the future is linked to the
moment and thus replicates Husserl's triadic intentionality.
Hans-Georg Gadamer would inherit his predecessors' concep-
tion of this temporal horizon and apply it to his general
hermeneutic outlook.35Gadamer, especially, made it clear that
this temporal horizon is not something that we acquire by placing
ourselves into an historical situation; but that we must already
possess this horizon in a primordial way in order to historically
locate ourselves or to even reckon with time, as Heidegger also
outlined. As a student of Heidegger, Gadamer studied his teacher
closely enough to duplicate his manner of spitting; he certainly
carried
forward
the
project
of
determining
the
nature
of
(hermeneutic) being within the horizon of time. For Gadamer's
purposes in Truth and Method, Heidegger's analysis of Dasein was
the turning point in raising what previously had been a mere
methodological concern in the historical thinking of Droysen and
others to the fundamental character of human existence. Gadamer
especially noted the futural character of Dasein through which
historical understanding acquired an ontological framework.36
Thanks to Heidegger's ontological analytic, Gadmaer recognized
that time did not produce gaps that required connections by
rooting oneself in the past. Any temporal distance that may appear
between, say a text and a reader, already lies along a continuum of
what Gadamer called tradition or positive forms of prejudice that
raise questions about the meaning of a text in the ﬁrst place.37 In
Dasein's predisposition to self-understanding Gadamer recognized
the
general
structure of
understanding
through which
the
commitment of tradition (the past) and its corresponding future
are effectively bundled in understanding per se. All of this, then,
happens within the rubric of what Gadamer labeled effective-
history or Wirkungsgeschicte, the process through which under-
standing the other (the text, work of art or a past event) we become
aware
of
the
unity
of
an
historical
object
and
historical
understanding. As in the case of Heidegger's analysis of temporal
unity, and Husserl's before, Gadamer also discovered a fusion of
horizons at the core of understanding; the goal of effective-history
was not an act of connecting isolated temporal horizons but the
illumination of the one horizon behind every hermeneutic situation.
Husserl uncovered various stages or phases of constitution in his
description of time consciousness, beginning with the transcenden-
tal object of time, passing through an immanent perception of time
consciousness and ﬁnally leading to that which is prior to all
constitution, a streamorﬂow ofconsciousnesswhich isabsolute and
beyond analysis. In the hands of Heidegger and Gadamer, these
essential structures of time consciousness would clarify a praxis. In
Heidegger's case the creative attitude would reveal itself in a
temporal circumspection towards the given environment of Dasein.
In Gadamer's case a productive hermeneutics would supplant the
romantic hermeneutics, identiﬁed with Ranke and Schleiermacher,
with a dynamic stance that surpassed mere reconstruction and the
empathic mechanisms of historicism.
Following the publication of Sein und Zeit in 1927, Martin
Heidegger sent a copy to Max Scheler (1874-1928). Even though
Scheler had his disagreements with Husserl, he had
been
associated with the phenomenological movement and was even
a founder of the famous Jahrbuch. Scheler responded to Heidegger's
work with a rather lengthy critique that, among other things,
challenged the solipsistic grounding of Heidegger's rendering of
Dasein. In general Scheler found that Heidegger had elevated
ordinary language to an ontological status in order to add heft to
his philosophical anthropology.38
Scheler had had his troubles in academia and during the war he
had turned to his father's Catholicism, a faith that Heidegger had
distanced himself from. Scheler died the following year, but he had
already made his mark on Catholic intellectuals. Edith Stein was
one of his enthusiastic students and Scheler's work would later
attract the attention of a young Pope John Paul II. Near the end of
his life his work had grown progressively political; ﬁve years after
his death the Nazis had suppressed his work because of his Jewish
heritage. His early critique of Heidegger's Sein und Zeit reveals that
the two were committed to the same sort of philosophical
anthropology, but that they approached it from starkly different a
priori vantage points.
35 Hans-Georg Gadamer, Truth and Method (New York, 1982), 271.
36 Gadamer, 231.
37 Gadamer, 264.
38 Max Scheler, ''Reality and Resistance: On Being and Time, Section 43, in
Heidegger, The Man and the Thinker, edited and translated by Thomas Sheehan
(Chicago, 1981), 133-45.
G.R. Ricci / History of European Ideas 36 (2010) 419-426
425

Scheler's review paid close attention to the picture that
Heidegger had painted of the ontological character of Care. As
the core feature of Dasein, Care predisposes us not only to a world
but equips Dasein with what Scheler refers to as an Urbeﬁndlichkeit
through which the world is disclosed. Since this state of mind is the
manner in which Dasein ﬁnds itself in, nothing need face or
encounter Dasein in order to produce such a state of mind.
Heidegger would disclose his debt to Kierkegaard when he
designated this emotional a priori as dread or anxiety. The positive
results for Heidegger were that this anxiety supplies the basis for
authentic potentiality and an utter individuation that sets us off
from the crowd or herd mentality. Heidegger may very well have
violated his own prescription when he came under the inﬂuence of
Nazism in the thirties.
Scheler recognized Heidegger's sources in Kierkegaard and
Pascal but he questioned if dread was the essential emotive link to
the being-in-the-world that Heidegger made out.39 To Scheler,
Heidegger
had
not
adequately
determined
the
ontological
signiﬁcance of Care and dread from what could be the case under
any given cultural context or historical stage of man's develop-
ment. In other words, Heidegger may have simply inﬂated an
ordinary disposition to ontological status without demonstrating
persuasively how it might be universally applicable. Scheler
questioned if the emotive a priori that Heidegger singled out could
just as well explain archaic peoples' attitude toward the world
(see footnote 39).
Scheler died before Heidegger had a chance to respond to the
critique of Care and dread in Sein und Zeit but he did publicly claim
that Scheler was among the leading intellects of post World War I.
Heidegger, then, must have listened carefully when Scheler
explained the pivotal role of Care and dread in his work in terms
of a longstanding tradition dating to the beginning of Judaism and
Christianity. Under the weight of the religious tradition's deﬁnition
of sinful humanity and the design to return to a lost paradise,
Scheler pointed out, anxiety and dread became the affective tone
of
humanity's
struggle
for
progress
and
the
technological
transformation of the world. In spite of the deep inﬂuence of this
historical tradition, there still remained a gap between Heidegger's
ontology of man and the cultural dominance of anxiety producing
worldviews and religious outlooks. Even Heidegger's efforts to
dress up what Scheler saw as connections with the world that were
too materialistic in language like ''being-ahead-of-itself-already-
in-a-world'' did not adequately indicate the true form of human
existence. Heidegger must have made special note of this criticism
since he had publicly distanced himself from his early theological
concerns. Now in his effort to disclose the fundamental ontological
landscape of Dasein, Heidegger imported a rich religious vocabu-
lary in ideas like fallenness. call to conscience, guilt, ekstasis, and
lumen naturale to describe and introduce the idea of the Lichtung as
the locus of Dasein's disclosedness.
Scheler had previously argued that certain values be considered
objective phenomenon in the same way that material objects are.
Thus we could have expected him to agree with Heidegger's
emphasis on the ontological preeminence of Care. He agreed with
Heidegger on the ontological value of emotional predispositions,
but he would not have given dread the honors that Heidegger
bestowed on this unsettling mood. Scheler, who had argued for
love as an instrument of knowledge, asked Heidegger to consider
substituting hope as the frame of mind that presses forward and
more accurately corresponds to the ''being-ahead-of-itself-al-
ready-in-a-world'' (see footnote 39) that Heidegger deﬁned as the
temporal nucleus of Care.
In the end Heidegger's description of Care derives from a
preoccupation with death and anxiety about being-in-the-world.
Even though the confrontation with annihilation is a being-
toward-death and is not conceived as a mere end point; still the
underlying stress that comes with being-towards-death chroni-
cally threatens us with a feeling of being away from home or
unheimlichkeit and that we are always at risk of getting lost in the
crowd.40 This is just the sort of existential landscape and
interpretive journey in which the traveler is obliged to abandon
all hope.
39 Sheehan, 143.
40 Heidegger discusses the complications of anxiety and its role in causing the
feeling of being away from home in 40 ''The Basic State-of-Mind of Anxiety as a
Distinctive Way in which Dasein is Disclosed'' in Being and Time, Macquarrie and
Robinson translation (New York, 1962).
G.R. Ricci / History of European Ideas 36 (2010) 419-426
426

