Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology
ISSN: 0007-1773 (Print) 2332-0486 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rbsp20
Pyrrhonian Scepticism: A Therapeutic
Phenomenology
John M. Heaton
To cite this article: John M. Heaton (1997) Pyrrhonian Scepticism: A Therapeutic
Phenomenology, Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology, 28:1, 80-96, DOI:
10.1080/00071773.1997.11007185
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00071773.1997.11007185
Published online: 21 Oct 2014.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 115
View related articles 
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rbsp20

Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology, Vol. 28, No. I, January 1997 
PYRRHONIAN SCEPTICISM: A THERAPEUTIC 
PHENOMENOLOGY 
JOHN M. HEATON 
Philosophy is usually taught. Philosophers tend to have various thoughts 
which they may or may not form into a system. These thoughts are usually 
imparted to others by lectures and discussions and are often written down in 
papers and books. Also philosophers spend much time in criticizing some 
people's thoughts and in recommending others. In other words philosophers, 
especially since Kant, have tended to be professors, that is people who are 
recognised as being learned and are paid to teach what they know and what 
they have thought. 
But there is a very different way of philosophising, in fact one of the 
standard sources of this way has a book called 'Against the Professors'.' The 
emphasis here is on thinking rather than on thoughts. Its way of speaking and 
writing is not one of instruction, a tranquil and continuous discourse, but of 
questioning and so of discontinuity. Its aim is therapy because understanding 
in this tradition depends on the persons addressed being in a state of conflict 
or confusion; they are in the grip of some illusion and are unhappy because 
they too eagerly pursue or avoid matters which in their confusion they 
believe are important. So it is addressed to the individual who can 
acknowledge his confusion and seeks to be released from it. If a person is not 
in a state of conflict, or does not recognise that he is, then this way of 
philosophising has little to offer other than perhaps satisfying an intellectual 
curiosity about an important movement in philosophy. 
The philosophy I am going to discuss is Pyrrhonian scepticism. This must 
be differentiated from modem scepticism, that is sceptical arguments based 
on sceptical scenarios. These seek to undermine the evidence for our claims 
to knowledge. Examples would be Descartes' demon and a more modem 
version would be the brain in the vat scenario. How do I know that my brain 
is not in a vat on Alpha Centauri and my experiences and beliefs are being 
produced solely by direct electrical and chemical stimulation of my brain by 
advanced intelligent beings? This form of scepticism is not interested in 
therapy, in people's unhappiness, but in knowledge and certainty. It assumes 
that certainty is desirable and that the more evidence we have for our 
knowledge the better; so it musters arguments to demonstrate that certain 
knowledge has or has not been attained. Typically it does not question the 
nature of certainty or its desirability and is not interested in finding a path 
from a state of conflict to peace. 
I will first of all give a brief historical account of Pyrrhonian scepticism as 
80 

this very important movement in therapy is not well known either to 
therapists or to philosophers.2 Then I will indicate what I think it is trying to 
get at and compare it with phenomenology and Wittgenstein's thought. 
Finally I will briefly show its importance to present day psychotherapy. · 
History 
The founder of the sceptical way was Pyrrho of Elis (c.360-c.206 B.C.). 
He wrote nothing at all but lived an exemplary life which inspired others to 
write about what they had learned from him; he accompanied Alexander the 
Great to India where he learned the sceptical way from Indian sages. 
There are many connections between Greek scepticism and Eastern 
thought.' Nagarjuna who lived in the second century A.D., when Greek 
scepticism flourished, wrote extensively on the "quadrilemma". This states 
that we must not say of "reality" that it is, that it is not, that it is and is not, 
nor can we say that it neither is nor is not. Exactly the same was said by 
Pyrrho according to his pupil Timon. Zen and Chan Buddhism as well as the 
Tibetan Dzogschen school are all strongly sceptical and derive from this way 
of thinking. 
Around 272 B.C. Arcesilaus became head of Plato's Academy and 
scepticism became its teaching. Arcesilaus introduced epoche into its 
vocabulary. Later Carneades became its head. He was a master dialectician 
and controversialist, "even the rhetoricians would dismiss their classes and 
go to hear him lecture, such was his philosophical stature".' Once he was 
asked to give two lectures in Rome as an ambassador from Greece to Rome. 
The ftrst was a detailed defence of justice and the second a point by point 
refutation of the first lecture. The Romans were not amused at this 
destruction of Roman virtue and so Cato the Censor had him expelled from 
the city. Like Socrates neither Arcesilaus nor Carneades published their 
arguments, all we know of them are reports from pupils. 
Gradually the Academy drifted into dogmatic scepticism and so there was 
a breakaway movement led by Aenesidemus early in the ftrst century A.D. 
He bitterly attacked the dogmatism of the contemporary Academy and spoke 
of philosophizing in Pyrrho's way as a means to happiness. Pyrrhonian 
scepticism revived and interesting enough for our purposes it became very 
popular with physicians. 
The last great name in Pyrrhonian scepticism that I want to mention is 
Sextus Empiricus. He was a practising physician who lived around 200 A.D. 
His book on scepticism has survived5 and is a compendium of some 500 
years of sceptical practice. 
Pyrrhonian scepticism however did not flourish in a Roman or Christian 
world and practically disappeared by 300 A.D. Cicero's dogmatic scepticism 
was the only form of scepticism that continued to be of interest. There was 
81 

some interest in Pyrrhonian scepticism in Byzantium and they preserved 
Sextus Empiricus' writings. These were translated in Western Europe around 
1562 and soon became very influential. Montaigne, Erasmus and Gassendi 
being three great names associated with Pyrrhonian scepticism." Descartes 
was concerned to refute it by building up a systematic body of knowledge 
immune to doubt. However he failed to understand the Pyrrhonian form of 
scepticism taking it to be simply an extreme form of doubt about the 
possibility of knowledge. Hume again was profoundly influenced by the 
Pyrrhonian movement but retreated to a "mitigated scepticism or academical 
philosophy". He like Descartes never really understood the centrality of 
therapy in Pyrrhonian thinking. It is partly I think the influence of Wittgen-
stein's notion of philosophy as therapy that has helped to fuel the current 
interest in and new understanding of Pyrrhonian thinking. 
What is Pyrrhonian scepticism? 
Although Greek sceptical thought can be traced from pre-Classical Ionia 
to the 2nd Century A.D. Roman Empire I will concentrate on Sextus 
Empiric us' account as this is the best and most complete source for 
Pyrrhonian scepticism. 
Now the Hellenistic schools of philosophy, Epicurians, Sceptics and 
Stoics, all practiced philosophy as a way of addressing and alleviating the 
most painful problems of human life. Epicurus wrote: "Empty is that 
philosopher's argument by which no human suffering is therapeutically 
treated. For just as there is no use in a medical art that does not cast out the 
sicknesses of bodies, so too there is no use in philosophy, unless it casts out 
the suffering of the soul".' Most philosophers had to earn their living by 
alleviating human misery as best they could. 
Philosophers had to show that their philosophy was compatible with the 
way they lived; hence there was great interest in accounts of the way they 
died. Clever intellectual arguments about the pointlessness of fearing death 
were not enough. Philosophy was often a rather dangerous occupation. Thus 
Anaxarchus, a sceptic who was a contemporary of Pyrrho, was said to have 
cured Alexander the Great from thinking he was a god; but he was then 
employed by a tyrant who he enraged and so had him pummelled to death. It 
is said that: "He paid no attention to the torment, saying 'Pound the envelope 
that contains Anaxarchus: you do not pound Anaxarchus himself ."8 
So what was the sceptical way? They were struck by the fact that conflict 
seems to be the source of a great deal of human unhappiness. Take pain for 
example. Many people believe that pain is an intrinsic evil. When in pain 
they have thoughts such as: "The evil is now with me", or worse as in 
cardiac pain: "I am going to die and this is a terrible evil". Now this belief 
will tend to intensify the pain, there will be a conflict between what appears 
82 

so and what is believed about it. Take the belief away, or rather its intensity, 
and the person: "will remain unaffected in matters of belief, and will endure 
only moderate suffering in respect of what he can't avoid".9 There is plenty 
of evidence of the effect of belief on pain. A well known study in the 1939-
45 war compared people with identical wounds, one lot obtained in battle 
and the other in civil life. The former had far less pain because a wound in a 
battle is accompanied by the belief that survival is likely whereas in civil life 
an accident is a disaster. 
Sextus defines scepticism: "As an ability (dunamis) to set out oppositions 
among things which appear and are thought of in any way at all, an ability by 
which, because of the equipollence (isostheneia) in the opposed objects and 
accounts, we come first to suspension of judgement ( epoche) and afterwards 
to tranquility" .10 
Scepticism is defined as an ability; this means that it is not a technique or 
part of any organised body of knowledge. One learns a capability, a know-
how, an ability to set up oppositions amongst impressions and beliefs. This is 
done "in any way at all" which means there is no special preferred procedure 
for setting up oppositions; the sceptic is not procedurally any more than 
content dogmatic. 
The sceptic is an enquirer or seeker of truth who becomes disturbed by the 
contradictions and discrepancies he meets in the world. Sextus has many lists 
of these - between scientific theories, ethical beliefs, how the same thing 
appears differently to different people, to the same person at different times 
and places and so on. 
11 In other words he is struck by the presence of conflict 
in the world and the different accounts people give of it. 
I quote Sextus again: "Sceptics began to do philosophy in order to decide 
among appearances and to apprehend which are true and which false, so as 
to become tranquil, but they came upon equipollent dispute, and being 
unable to decide this they suspended judgement, tranquility in matters of 
opinion followed fortuitously. 
For those who hold the opinion that things are good or bad by nature are 
perpetually troubled. When they lack what they believe to be good, they take 
themselves to be persecuted by natural evils and they pursue what (they 
think) is good. And when they have acquired these things, they experience 
more troubles; for they are elated beyond reason and measure, and in fear of 
change they do anything so as not to loose what they believe to be good. But 
those who make no determination about what is good and bad by nature 
neither avoid nor pursue anything with intensity; and hence they are tranquil. 
A story told of the painter Apelles applies to the Sceptics. They say he 
was painting a horse and wanted to represent in his picture the lather on the 
horse's mouth; but he was so unsuccessful that he gave up, took the sponge 
on which he had been wiping off the colours from his brush, and flung it at 
83 

the picture. And when it hit the picture, it produced a representation of the 
horse's lather". 12 
So the epoche, suspension of judgement, is not a matter of the will, not is 
it a result of logical argument from premises to conclusion. It follows 
suspension of judgement "as a shadow follows a body". 13 It is important to 
understand the notion of equipollence (isostheneia) here. When the 
arguments (logos- accounts, or considerations, there is no satisfactory 
translation) on the two sides are balanced or appear equally convincing then 
there is suspension of judgement and epoche followed by tranquility may 
supervene. The arguments need not proceed in any standard way by premises 
to conclusion. Clever people may require clever arguments, simple people 
simple ones, arguments are devised that are appropriate to the person being 
treated, ones that he or she understands. All that matters is that the 
inclination behind the different arguments balances for they are reminders of 
what can be said against any dogmatic position. When the arguments balance 
there is no judgement that the issue is undecideable, that would be to fall into 
a dogmatically sceptical position. For example to say that "nothing can be 
known" is a dogmatic statement and not a Pyrrhonian one. The sceptic 
makes avowals (apangelia), or remarks, that is expressions which imply no 
belief about the nature of reality. The phrase "no more this than that" makes 
clear his feelings but he does not make a fuss about what phrase to use. 
14 He 
does not take up a position or stake a claim or become attached to or attempt 
to prove anything because he is sceptical about all forms of proof in so far as 
they claim to tell us the nature of reality. 
The epoche is not a timeless moment recollected in tranquility. It is a 
repetition in Kierkegaard's sense rather than a recollection. For recollection· 
is repeated backwards whereas repetition is recollected forwards. It is a 
destructive and projective movement. 
The epoche has a moment of irony but this, as Kierkegaard pointed out, is 
liable to collapse into a wild infinity, a nihilism. But it may be controlled and 
then one enters into the realm of humour, a properly situated irony, which 
circumscribes and so yields truth and balance. 15 The ancient Greek sceptical 
version of this was Menippean satire few of which have survived. Modem 
examples very like it are Don Quixote, Sterne's Tristram Shandy and much 
of Beckett. Interestingly scepticism has not inspired tragedy. 
The Husser/ian epoche 
There is a crucial difference between Husserl's notion of the epoche and 
the sceptical one. For Husserl the epoche is reached through a procedure 
which is something he would have us do. It is a procedure whose point of 
departure is the natural attitude and whose terminus is transcendental subjec-
tivity. Its central component is "suspension" of every commitment which 
84 

appears within or in any way determines that natural attitude. Furthermore 
the natural attitude and its commitments are all construed as mental acts or 
attitudes or states. So we are simply taken from one state of mind to another. 
To both sceptics and to Husserl the epoche is of central importance. 
Husserl wrote: "Perhaps it will even become manifest that the total 
phenomenological attitude and the epoche belonging to it are destined in 
essence to effect, at flrst, a complete personal transformation, compatible in 
the beginning to a religious conversion". 16 
The sceptic however flnds that Husserl is hopelessly dogmatic. He gives 
us a set of instructions but does not, in fact cannot, tell us how to evaluate 
them. When one is given instructions on how to reach a goal then one needs 
a criterion, independent of whether or not the instructions have been carried 
out, to be able to recognise if the state of affairs which is the goal in question 
obtains. One can then evaluate the instructions to see if they work. For then 
one can see if the goal has been reached and how efficiently by carrying out 
the instructions. But if, on the other hand, the end state can only be 
recognised or adequately conceived by someone who has already carried out 
the instructions, then one cannot evaluate it. And of course this is even more 
difficult when the end state in question is a state of mind. How can we 
recognise it? 
Exactly the same problem occurs in psychoanalysis. How can we 
recognise when a person has been well analysed? How can we assess how 
far he has got through the depressive position for example? There are huge 
differences of opinion as to whether a particular person has been well 
analysed. In practice dogmatism reigns; if you have been analysed for a long 
time by a person recognised by a particular group then you have been well 
analysed, anyway according to that group. Never mind whether you enjoy 
living or are deeply confused. 
Sextus is very careful to avoid this trap. He shows that Pyrrhonian 
scepticism is not a method to be followed and does not consist of a set of 
instructions to reach a goal. In fact systematic goals of life, the notion of life 
as having a goal such as some transcendental state, is the very thing to be 
sceptical about. Intense ( suntonos) pursuit and avoidance of generalised 
goals such as health, the truth, enlightenment, reality, and so on is the root of 
all disturbance. To be "suntonos" about something is to stretch or strain 
toward it, it is the word used for a taut string of a musical instrument, or 
muscular tension. Intense here does not mean the same as being serious. The 
sceptics argued that concepts like "health" and "reality" as used by the 
Dogmatists had no clear meaning so to strain after a confused meaning is 
frivolous. 
Sextus shows that there is no possible criterion we can use which 
produces justified belief as a guide to the best life. He has no normative goal 
85 

to recommend. He suspends judgement on all such dogmas and goes on his 
way moved solely and directly by what appears to be appropriate. Plutarch 
puts it well: "action requires two things: an impression of something 
appropriate, and an impulse towards the apparent appropriate object; neither 
of these conflicts with epoche. For the argument keeps us away from 
opinion, not impulse or impression. So whenever something appropriate has 
appeared, no opinion is needed to get us moving and proceeding towards it, 
the impulse arrives immediately, since it is the soul's process and 
movement" .'7 
In other words the purpose of the arguments is to encourage us to attend 
to the phenomena rather than act in terms of the screen of explanations and 
confused concepts that block the sources of action. Attention is the prayer of 
the soul it has been said. This is precisely what sceptical arguments nudge 
one towards. 
Language and the epoche 
The sceptics talk of the epoche can sound as if it is a goal. Do they 
contradict themselves and become doctrinaire when they talk about it? No. 
To quote Aenesidemus: "For the Pyrrhonist determines absolutely nothing, 
not even this very claim that nothing is determined. (We put it this way, he 
says, for lack of a way to express the thought)".' 8 You can be non-assertive 
but what you cannot straightforwardly do is ASSERT that you are non-
assertive. For assertion is a way of speaking in which language itself is not at 
stake. The Pyrrhonist however questions the ability of language to express 
all truth by means of assertion. A thesis that both Heidegger and Wittgen-
stein elaborate on. 
Of course this does not mean that ordinary non-dogmatic assertions are 
not valid. Thus if I put a £10 note on the table and later see someone putting 
it in his pocket I may non-dogmatically assert that it is my money. To 
dogmatically assert that it is mine would be to imply that it somehow 
belonged intrinsically to me, that I had a metaphysical right to it. If I 
believed that then I would be thrown into painful conflict if it were taken. 
Sextus indicates that Sceptical utterances are more like avowals or confes-
sions than beliefs. They are reports of a feeling which is apparent to the one 
reporting it. "People who hold beliefs posit as real the things they hold 
beliefs about, while Sceptics utter their own phrases in such a way that they 
are implicitly cancelled by themselves, then they cannot be said to hold 
beliefs in uttering them". 19 The famous analogy of the ladder, used by 
Wittgenstein at the end of the Tractatus, comes in here. Sextus uses it in 
connection with his arguments against proof: "just as it is not impossible for 
a man who has ascended to a high place by ladder to overturn the ladder with 
his foot after the ascent, so also it is not unlikely that the Sceptic after he has 
86 

arrived at the demonstration of his thesis by means of the argument proving 
the non-existence of proof, as if by ladder, should then abolish the very 
argument".20 The sceptic's utterances cancel themselves, it is not a process of 
first stating a thesis and then cancelling it. 
The Pyrrhonian sceptic disputes the coherence of propositional accounts 
of discourse. 2' His term for proposition is "axioma", a Stoic term for a self-
complete incorporeal unit of meaning that is assertoric i.e. is either true or 
false of objective states of affairs. So in these terms a proposition "p" is 
absolutely self-refuting if then "not-p" is entailed as a necessary truth. Thus 
if I assert that "Nothing is true" then the claim's falsity is established by its 
necessary application to itself. Another example would be that there is no 
way of saying "I am saying nothing" without falsifying that claim. 
If the sceptic kept to this form of argument he would become a dogmatic 
sceptic. However he attends to the dissemination of language in time, the 
materiality of language. So he first refutes the Dogmatist's arguments and 
only then can he go on to defeat his own. He goes along with the 
Dogmatist's belief that there are sound proofs and that things can be asserted 
absolutely and then self-refutes his own arguments. After this he can give 
indications of scepticism only because the self-refuting nature of proposi-
tional argument has been shown. So the passage of time is essential. 22 As 
Sextus points out many times the Dogmatist is always in a hurry. Wittgen-
stein wrote: "In philosophy the winner of the race is the one who can run 
most slowly. Or: the one who gets there last".B 
The sceptic accepts appearances but questions dogma. For example we 
ordinarily say that honey is sweet. But if we are dogmatic we think that 
honey is really sweet. As Sextus puts it "It appears to us that honey sweetens 
(we concede this in as much we are sweetened in a perceptual way): but 
whether (as far as the argument goes) it is actually sweet is something we 
investigate - and this is not apparent but something said about what is 
apparent".24 When Sextus says "we are sweetened in a perceptual way" he is 
refusing to split the affection (pathos) into separate mental (subjective) and 
physical (objective) components. This would be dogmatic and Cartesian. The 
sceptic can say: "Hmm this is lovely sweet honey" but he would be unscep-
tical to say solemnly: "Honey is sweet" meaning that sweetness exists in the 
honey as part of its objective nature. 
The sceptic questions dogmatic or foundational beliefs. In Sextus' later 
work "Against the Professors" he produces sceptical arguments against 
foundational theory in linguistics, rhetoric, arithmetic, geometry, astrology 
and musical theory. Now in geometry for example he is not concerned to 
show that Pythagoras' theorem is wrong or in arithmetic that the Euclidean 
algorithm for finding the greatest common divisor of two numbers is wrong. 
That would be absurd. Instead he argues against any theoretical underpinning 
87 

of these activities, as for example that the line is made up of points. Ordinary 
concepts of line, number, music are not affected by his arguments. As so 
often his approach is similar to Wittgenstein's. Thus Wittgenstein's criticism 
of set theory is not that it is wrong but that it is not the foundation of 
mathematics; it is simply a branch of it. It is perhaps best to say that 
mathematical results are correct but not true; as in a game of chess, I might 
make a correct or even a clever move but I can't make a true one. 
Sceptical arguments do not give disproof of the dogmatist's views but are 
reminders of what can be said against them. Take the question of proof in 
mathematics. To the dogmatist proof as ordinarily understood in Western 
mathematics is a sophisticated technique which takes years of hard study to 
master and which is necessary if one is to be certain of one's results. But 
consider Ramanujan. He is one of the greatest mathematicians of this century 
and perhaps of all time. He was more or less self taught in a little town in 
south India and was invited over to Trinity College, Cambridge by Hardy. 
Hardy and other Cambridge mathematicians however were horrified to learn 
that Ramanujan got his most significant results mainly by praying to the 
Hindu goddess Namagiri and had a shaky understanding of Western methods 
of proof and in fact disdained them. Some mathematicians have spent a 
lifetime finding conventional proofs for some of Ramanujan's more esoteric 
results. 
So the sceptic wants to remind us that no proof is monolithic and leads 
inevitably to truth. There is no criterion of truth that he can accept. But as we 
are rational creatures it is natural for us to argue and seek proofs for our 
arguments but none are final. 
Husser) believed that he could refute scepticism by appealing to the self-
evidence of inner evidence. A mental seeing of something itself ... which is 
peifect evidence and its correlate, pure and genuine truth, ... truths that are 
valid, and remain so, once and for all and for everyone. 25 For most of his life 
Husserl believed that only science can attain such absolute truth by perpet-
ually striving in infinitum for apodictic evidence. Only at the end of his life 
in his last unfinished work, The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcen-
dental Phenomenology, did he come to see the essentially solipsistic and 
idealistic nature of these beliefs. 
The ancient sceptics would of course have criticised any idea of a final 
goal which is to be reached by "constant striving". They admitted that 
sceptical arguments are self-undercutting but were not embarrassed at this 
since they never claimed to establish any final truth by reasoning. 
Dogmatic scepticism was also challenged by Wittgenstein in the 
Tractatus where he argued that a question with a sense must have an answer 
whose truth is in principle determinable by an appeal to the contingent 
combination of things in the world. So dogmatic scepticism which generates 
88 

a non-terminating system of questions - an absolute goal after which we are 
continually striving - must lack sense. Dogmatic scepticism is nonsensical 
because it is in principle invulnerable. 
Meaning does not come in isolated chunks and is not fixed merely by 
word-thing correlations. An expression only has meaning when it is 
employed in a particular language game. A doubt that has no answer would 
make no move in a language game, it would stand in no connection with the 
rest of language and so lack meaning. 
Our ordinary beliefs are simply taken for granted and this is a conceptual 
point and not a sign of human weakness. For without a background of 
accepted beliefs, obtained mostly in childhood, our thinking could never get 
off the ground. These ordinary beliefs are not first principles or axioms but 
commonplaces. They are usually learned indirectly as part of other activities. 
When as children we are read a story we are not first told and seek evidence 
for the fact that books exist. Our participation in shared language games lies 
beyond any justification. 
Questions of doubt depend for their sense on a background of ordinary 
beliefs. The dogmatic sceptic raises totalizing doubts but as these expand 
their sense contracts and so wholly generalized doubts amount to nothing -
and lead to madness. 
For the apprentice sceptic arguments are probative and he/she is guided 
by the canons of reason. But if he continues on his journey he will come to 
see (not infer) that the very applicability of reason has been subverted. Then 
he will understand epoche and be happy with the self-refuting nature of his 
expressions. Sextus compared sceptical remarks to purgatives, once they 
have worked then they flush themselves out. The sceptic does not stop at the 
epoche, for it is not an end or goal, but he/she has a basic disposition to 
wondering, that is unanxious questioning, well described by Heidegger.26 
Sceptical Living 
The sceptic suspends judgement as to what things are "in their nature" so 
he/she lives by appearances. What is natural are those aspects of us which 
are unaffected by our beliefs. Loosing beliefs is not a matter of shedding 
information but not being taken in by them. 
He/she is guided by nature so he responds to his bodily needs and is 
guided by the human capacity to perceive, think, remember, feel, love, etc. 
Arcesilaus gave many arguments to show that action does not require beliefs 
but only appearance and impulse. Nature leads us to act even without 
rationally grounded assent. 
So the sceptic practices the arts and sciences and so is naturally involved 
in the laws and customs of the society he belongs to, the most basic of which 
is his language. Some accuse him of therefore being conservative. I do not 
89 

see that this follows. If it appears to him that certain laws are unjust and 
there is a revolutionary situation I see no reason why he would not join or 
start the revolution. He would not believe that a successful revolution would 
result in utopia however. 
The dogmatist is puffed up, self-loving, rash and arrogant. 27 He is taken in 
by beliefs of his own inherent importance. For dogma is to assent to 
something non-evident, that is something not given in appearance. It is 
positing the real existence of something. Pride is the root of all unnecessary 
suffering according to the sceptic. For in pride we posit importance to 
something non-evident. We are told that Pyrrho was hasty and irascible in 
his youth, scepticism taught him composure and good temper. Some sceptics 
said that ataraxia could also be called gentleness or kindness-praotes. 28 
Pyrrho lived with his sister and did not mind if he was seen doing the house 
cleaning and taking the pigs to market; they say he even showed his ataraxia 
by washing a pig. 29 This absence of sex role and class consciousness was 
very shocking to most people in those days. 
But why should freedom from conflict be our aim? Why should we aim at 
peace and tranquility? Is not the sceptic being dogmatic by saying this? His 
reply is that tranquility etc. is not the aim, we should not strive for these in 
any way. We should not even recommend scepticism! That would be 
dogmatic. The sceptic recognizes mental conflict and that will drive him to 
seek respite from it. So the flrst step is self awareness and then because he is 
a lover of his fellow men he/she will help them if they are in conflict. What 
the sceptic describes is a condition and a response to it. If a person is not too 
embedded in dogmatism they may recognise the condition and be helped by 
the sceptic's response. 
The natural human response is to live by appearance. Nature guides us in 
a normative way. We can only reach natural life indirectly by not seeking it 
but via the epoche. There is no argument to show us we are going in the right 
direction for any argument engaging with belief is more dogmatism. The 
sceptic just predicts what will happen. At best he can give us images of the 
way. For the sceptic's claims about happiness are claims about the nature of 
things, they do not entail beliefs. This contrasts with the dogmatist who uses 
arguments and persuasion to show us how to get from unhappiness to 
tranquility on the basis of correct beliefs. I should add that "happy" is not a 
good translation of the Greek eudaimonia, the condition which the sceptics 
and others were interested in. It means something like getting on well with 
the uncanny - the daimon. Perhaps we could say it is the realization of the 
uncanniness of being-in-the-world. 
Sextus argues that there is no expertise in living so there is no teaching of 
it, neither is there any learning of it for there is nothing to teach or to learn.30 
Sceptical therapy is not a technique to obtain a cure which takes place over a 
90 

length of time in the way that psychoanalysis is. Although the dogmatist may 
take a long time to understand this! Furthermore anyone who thinks he is an 
expert on the best way to live and tries to live that way is "the unhappiest 
man alive". For he thinks he is provided with self control in his impulses 
towards the bad and revulsion from the good. He may then be called the self 
controlled sage but he is dogmatic. For he will have positive beliefs as to 
what is supremely good and will be strongly committed to their achievement. 
His seeking the "good" will be the projection of his own desires, a process of 
denial and assertion with regard to an idea conceived by himself. This will 
lead to great conflict if he fails to achieve his goal. The sceptic is therefore 
"not self controlled as far as his intelligence goes"." 
But when a person gets a clear view (Ubersicht) of the network of 
activities - expecting, desiring, recognising etc. in which seeking takes 
place, then epoche and ataraxia, tranquility or calmness of soul may befall 
him/her. 
The sceptics had no concept of the will, if they had known of its 
Dogmatic use they would have argued against it. They were clear that 
tranquility cannot be an end to aim at; it cannot be willed. For the will is a 
desire that has become habitual and seeks to dominate other desires. 
Tranquility cannot be attained by any process of domination or by following 
a saviour. 
The task is to be able to distinguish the genuinely desirable from what 
some dogmatic belief forces one to follow. The Stoics thought that the wise 
man must formulate any desire in the form of a normative question to which, 
after deliberation, he/she either assents or demurs. Thus when offered a juicy 
looking apple one should formulate the desire in the form of a normative 
question - is it right for me to eat the apple? So if the apple is eaten it is 
because one has assented to a normative proposition i.e. "It is right for me to 
eat the apple". So action is or ought to be the result of assent to or dissent 
from a proposition. 
The sceptics as early as Arcesilaus pointed out that this is a dogmatic 
account of desire and its relation to action. They disputed that this account 
could be justified in the Stoics own terms and they disputed that this account 
was necessary to make same human action a possibility. The sceptic goes on 
his way moved solely and directly by what APPEARS to be appropriate. He 
does not assent to or reject any particular proposition; propositions do not 
have to intrude between desire and action. In other words Stoics claim that 
desire requires representations while Sceptics try to show that one can desire 
without representations. 
It is helpful to remember Wittgenstein's remarks on the proposition.32 He 
shows that propositions are not pictures of states of affairs or objects of 
belief or knowledge. If I assent to the proposition: "It is right to eat the 
91 

apple" all that amounts to is that the substitution "I should eat the apple" = "I 
believe that the proposition that it is right for me to eat the apple" is permis-
sible in our grammar. Propositions and states of affairs "belong" to but do 
not "fit" each other. Propositions are not exclusive guides to action. Proposi-
tions are not expressions of thought in the way that a cry is an expression of 
pain; we can thoughtfully take the apple without a proposition coming 
between the thought and the apple. 
Psychotherapy and Pyrrhonian Scepticism 
I will now tum to the contemporary practice of psychotherapy to show the 
relevance of scepticis~. Much of what I have already written can be seen to 
be relevant. Thus the above discussion of desire and action is very different 
to Freud's theory of the super-ego in which word presentations come 
between thought and action, he has no satisfactory account of thoughtful 
action. 
First of all I should point out the style of writing of most modern 
psychotherapists. They write as instructors, as people who know and expect 
their readers to blindly follow them. They rarely question their basic beliefs 
but assume them as given and form a school around them. In no way do they 
encourage the reader to stop and question what is written let alone help him 
become aware of how words must fall silent in order to mean. So the 
Sceptics did not form a school which is held together by beliefs." Freud, 
according to his biographer Jones, was constantly preoccupied with 
furthering "the cause" of psychoanalysis. To the sceptic this was unwise and 
would cause unnecessary anxiety, Timon for example simply cultivated his 
garden, many leading sceptics wrote nothing. Montaigne wrote many 
sceptical essays but in his preface to them wrote: "I myself am the subject of 
my book: it is not reasonable that you should employ your leisure on a topic 
so frivolous and so vain". 
Freud and others repeatedly confuse their beliefs and theories with the 
phenomena they seek to explain; they obliterate the distinction between 
conceptual and factual investigation. They use their clinical observations 
from analytic sessions to support their theories not realizing that their 
observations and method of treatment are dependent on their theories; so the 
theory cannot be an adequate explanation of the phenomena. This is a central 
difficulty in sceptical therapy. For people are not generally aware of their 
basic beliefs nor are they aware of the way their concepts articulate the field 
of their experience. The dogmatist cannot differentiate between his concepts, 
beliefs and the phenomena. Thus a person suffering severe pain from a heart 
attack usually cannot differentiate between the pain and his beliefs about 
death. Contrast the account of Montaigne who was knocked off his horse and 
came too vomiting blood; he lay on the ground enjoying the sensations of 
92 

what he thought was dying; he surrendered to the sensations having freed 
himself from vain beliefs. 
Freud and most analysts use what they consider to be scientific reason to 
conquer irrational desires, so the analyst is supposed to be a highly rational 
person. Not so the sceptic. For he/she questions the unity of scientific reason. 
Is there just one type of scientific reason? Does a theoretical physicist reason 
in the same way as a palaeontologist or a botanist interested in classifica-
tions? And why should scientific reason be considered inherently superior to 
the reasoning of a business man or a housewife? Is not reason dependent on 
context? A scientist may reason clearly at work but not in his love affairs or 
when he is dying. 
The sceptic uses a series of self refuting arguments of increasing subtlety 
from half strength to a nearly lethal dose according to the intelligence and 
grip of the dogmatic belief on the person he/she is treating.34 He thus uses 
reason to open up, or deconstruct, reason. As he desires to cure us of the 
disease of precipitant Dogmatism by speech he/she is attentive to the timing 
of first refuting the dogmatist and only then going on to refute his own 
arguments. 
Sceptical therapy is directed at the personal and singular, the precise place 
of conflict and uses the beliefs of the sufferer to undermine themselves. So it 
intertwines with the conflict. There is no standard method of treatment to be 
applied to all with perhaps an ideal as in psychoanalysis when fifty minutes 
five times a week for at least five years is the ideal. Sextus produces an 
enormous variety of arguments from the absurd or simple to extremely 
subtle, to be used according to the state and responses of the sufferer. 
The sceptic does not diagnose disease in terms of any underlying cause or 
structure. This aspect of scepticism has aroused blind fury in physicians from 
Galen to the present day so let me elaborate. The sceptic attends to the state 
of conflict and allows this to be indicative of its own treatment.35 He attends 
to where the shoe pinches. He argues that it is dogmatic to believe that there 
is a condition such as hysteria or schizophrenia which underlies the conflict 
and must be treated by some standard method. At best these diagnostic 
words are commemorative signs which may be useful to remind us that there 
are certain similarities between groups of people in conflict. 
But that there are indicative signs in these people which point to an 
underlying structure causing the condition is not evident. Sextus has 
powerful arguments against conditional inference, that is, when one infers 
from a general proposition if "p" then "q" and the antecedent "p" that q is 
true. The non-evident underlying structure can always be in dispute, it is 
always rationally possible to doubt its particular nature. Of course indicative 
signs can be useful as speculations, as for example the inference that because 
we sweat therefore there are pores in the skin. The invention of the 
93 

microscope proved that this is so, but the conditional inference alone does 
not prove it. 
This approach contrasts with that of Freud who sought the underlying 
mechanisms and causes of mental conflict. He never questioned the truth 
value of conditionals. He believed that there are mental mechanisms "in the 
mind" - in the unconscious - which are in some way causal of neurosis. 
Speculating that sexuality, or the sexual instinct is the root cause. 
This way of understanding human unhappiness leads to a completely 
blind alley as is shown by the present state of psychotherapy in which there 
are hundreds of schools and splinter groups each claiming dogmatically to 
know the causes of unhappiness or at least to know the right method to find 
them. Wittgenstein wrote: "The insidious thing about the causal point of 
view is that it leads us to say: 'of course it had to happen like that'. Whereas 
we ought to think: 'It may have happened like that, or in many other 
ways'.")6 
This leads to the question of free association. Freud observed that if 
people in conflict are listened to then they will tend to free associate and it 
was part of his genius to recognise the importance of that.-17 But of course 
Freud did not invent free association, the sceptic Montaigne for example 
found himself free associating. Unfortunately Freud never asked himself 
why his patients, if left to themselves, free associated. Instead, because of his 
scientistic tendencies, he turned it into a technique to discover hidden 
structures - the unconscious - which he thought were the cause of 
symptoms. 
To the sceptic free association is not a technique to reach the unconscious 
but rather a natural way to set up equipollence between conflicting accounts. 
So of course she attends to slips of the tongue, dreams, jokes, and symptoms 
for these indicate the relevant conflicts, where the shoe pinches. They require 
an understanding and weighing of the different meanings in play which 
reveal hidden dogma. 
Montaigne wrote: "Being consists in movement and action".)K Nature is 
movement and action so to live in harmony with her we must shed our fixed 
beliefs and attend to the demands of our inner spontaneity which we all too 
often work against. This is what we are doing when we free associate 
without using it as a technique. Nature cannot be understood from the 
standpoint of her causes but she can be accepted from the standpoint of her 
effects. 
Freud wrote at the end of his life that psychoanalysis is probably not very 
effective as a therapy and is likely to be replaced by drug treatment. He was 
a master of suspicion; he set out to decipher the expressions of consciousness 
to find out what underlay it, its causes. This is a far cry from Pyrrhonian 
scepticism which for a start questions the very notions of consciousness and 
94 

cause but is basically concerned with the nature of desire and happiness 
( eudaimonia) rather than cultivating a Cartesian suspicion which leads to the 
creation of a hypothetical anatomy or psychopathology of the mind. 
Conclusion 
The sceptics are enquirers (To enquire is skeptesthai which is cognate 
with skeptikos) but to enquire is not the same as to seek, for in inquiry there 
is no end to be gained and held. Inquiry does not seek answers. 
"Sceptics are philanthropic and wish to cure by speech (logos), as far as 
they can, the conceit and rashness of the Dogmatists".39 Arrogance and a 
deep misunderstanding of the nature of time are the two pillars of 
Dogmatism. Their dissolution requires attention to the motley of linguistic 
practices and their contexts. 
It is a philosophy and therapy that is dependent on dialogue (logos) and so 
on the responses of the individual addressed. "There is at least this to be said 
for mind, that it can dispel mind"43 is a theme underlying therapeutic 
scepticism. For loss and nothingness in their many forms are at the heart of 
life. 
Philadelphia Association, London 
References 
I. Sextus Empiricus, Adversus Mathematicus Vol. 4. Trans. R.G. Bury. Loeb Classical 
Library. London: W. Heinemann. 1949. 
2. R.J. Hankinson, The Sceptics. London: Routledge. 1995. This is a good account of the 
history and arguments of Pyrrhonian scepticism. 
3. E. Flintoff, "Pyrrho and India" Phronesis 25, 88-108. 1980. 
4. Diogenes Laertius. Trans. R.D. Hicks. Loeb Library. London: Heinemann. 1972. 4.62. 
5. Sextus Empiricus, Outlines of Scepticism. Trans. J. Annas and J. Barnes. Cambridge 
University Press. 1994. Also Sextus Empiricus. Trans. R.G. Bury. Vol 2,3,4. Loeb Classical 
Library: W. Heinemann. 1935, 1936 and 1949. The Skeptic Way: Sextus Empiricus's 
Outlines of Pyrrhonism. Trans. and Comment. Benson Mates. Oxford University Press. 
1996. 
6. R.H. Popkin, The History of Scepticism from Erasmus to Spinoza. California: U.C.P. 1979. 
7. M.C. Nussbaum, The Therapy of Desire. Princeton University Press. 1994. p.315. 
8. Diogenes Laertius. Ibid. 9.59. 
9. Sextus Empiricus, Outlines of Scepticism. Ibid. 3, 325-6. 
10. Sextus Empiricus, Outlines of Scepticism. Ibid. I, 8. 
II. J. Annas and J. Barnes, The Modes of Scepticism. Cambridge University Press. 1985. 
12. Sextus Empiricus, Outlines of Scepticism. Ibid. I, 28. 
13. Sextus Empiricus, Outlines of Scepticism. Ibid. I, 29. 
14. Sextus Empiricus, Outlines of Scepticism. Ibid. I, 187-196. 
15. S. Kierkegaard, The Concept of Irony. Trans. H.V. Hong and E.H. Hong. Princeton 
University Press. 1989. pp.324-9. 
16. E. Husser!, The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology. Trans. D. 
Carr. Evanston: Northwestern University Press. 1970. p.I37. 
17. Plutarch, in The Hellenistic Philosophers. Trans. A.A. Long and D.N. Sedley. Vol 
Cambridge University Press. 1987. p.450. 
18. Photius, in The Hellenistic Philosophers. Ibid. p.469. 
95 

19. Sextus Empiricus, Outlines of Scepticism. Ibid. I, 15. 
20. Sextus Empiricus, Against the Logicians. Ibid. Vol. 2, 2, 481. 
21. Sextus Empiricus, Outlines of Scepticism. Ibid. 2, 81-4. 
22. M.L. McPherran, "Sceptical Homeopathy and Self-refutation", Phronesis 32, 290-328. 
1987. 
23. L. Wittgenstein, Culture and Value. Trans. P. Winch. Oxford: B. Blackwell. 1977. p.34. 
24. Sextus Empiricus, Outlines of Scepticism. Ibid. I, 20. 
25. E. Husserl, Canes ian Meditations. Trans. D. Cairns. The Hague: M. Nijhoff. 1960. p.l2. 
26. M. Heidegger, Basic Questions of Philosophy. Trans. R. Rojcewicz and A. Schuwer. 
lndianopolis: Indiana University Press. 1994. pp.l33-7. 
27. Sextus Empiricus, Outlines of Scepticism. Ibid. I, 20; I, 90; I, 177; 2, 258. 
28. Diogenes Laertius,lbid. 9, 108. 
29. Diogenes Laertius, Ibid. 9, 65-6. 
30. Sextus Empiricus, Adversus. Ibid. 3, 455. 
31. Sextus Empiricus, Outlines of Scepticism. Ibid. 3, 25-30. 
32. L. Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations. Para. 134-142. 
33. Sextus Empiricus, Outlines of Scepticism. Ibid. I, 16-17. 
34. M.L. McPherran, Ibid. 
35. M. Frede, "The Method of the So-called Methodical School of Medicine" in Essays in 
Ancient Philosophy. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 1987. pp.261-278. 
36. L. Wittgenstein, Culture and Value. Ibid. p.37. 
37. J. Breuer and S. Freud, Studies in Hysteria. Trans. A.A. Brill. Standard Edition 20. 
38. M. de Montaigne, "On the affection of fathers for their children" in The Complete Essays. 
Trans. M.A. Screech. Allen Lane: The Penguin Press. 1991. p.434. 
39. Sextus Empiricus, Outlines of Scepticism. Ibid. 3, 32. 
43. S. Beckett, Disjecta. London: J. Calder. 1983. p.95. 
96 

