Philosophical Explorations
ISSN: 1386-9795 (Print) 1741-5918 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rpex20
The (in)visibility of others: a reply to Herschbach
Dan Zahavi & Shaun Gallagher
To cite this article: Dan Zahavi & Shaun Gallagher (2008) The (in)visibility of others: a reply to
Herschbach, Philosophical Explorations, 11:3, 237-244, DOI: 10.1080/13869790802302306
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13869790802302306
Published online: 01 Dec 2008.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 318
View related articles 
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rpex20

The (in)visibility of others: a reply to Herschbach
Dan Zahavia and Shaun Gallagherb,c
aDanish National Research Foundation: Center for Subjectivity Research, Department of
Media, Cognition and Communication, University of Copenhagen, Denmark;
bPhilosophy and Cognitive Sciences, University of Central Florida, Orlando, Florida,
USA; cSchool of Humanities, University of Hertfordshire, Hatﬁeld, UK
In his article 'Folk Psychological and Phenomenological Accounts of Social Perception' (this issue),
Mitchell Herschbach raises some critical questions concerning our phenomenological approach to
intersubjectivity. We welcome Herschbach's comments in the spirit of constructive criticism, but
also think that he has missed some crucial aspects of our argumentation. We take this opportunity
to amplify and clarify our views.
Keywords: theoryofmind;simulation;second-personapproach;socialperception;phenomenology
1.
Introduction
In his article 'Folk Psychological and Phenomenological Accounts of Social Perception', Mitchell
Herschbach raises some critical questions vis-a`-vis our phenomenological approach to inter-
subjectivity. While Herschbach concedes that our account provides a viable alternative to the
personal-level versions of theory theory and simulation theory, he does not think that we have
been successful in criticizing sub-personal-level versions of these theories. More speciﬁcally,
whereas he claims that Gallagher's arguments against the notion of sub-personal simulation are
unpersuasive, he maintains that Zahavi never offers any arguments against the notion of sub-
personal theorizing, but rather simply asserts that social understanding is non-theoretical.
We welcome Herschbach's comments in the spirit of constructive criticism, and we would like
to take this opportunity to amplify and clarify our views. Before we show that Herschbach misses
the point on some crucial aspects of our argumentation, let us quickly mention some of the issues
where we actually agree with him. We certainly share his emphasis on the importance of dis-
tinguishing personal and sub-personal accounts of social cognition. We have no quarrels with
his claim that one's conscious recognition of, say, emotional expressions in others is subserved
by various sub-personal mechanisms, and ﬁnally, and in this context most importantly, we whole-
heartedly agree when he writes that a core assumption of both theory theory and simulation
theory is that we perceive or experience only the physical movements of another person,
since the mental states of others are unobservable. Thus, whereas the theory theory and the
simulation theory are frequently depicted as quite opposed accounts of the basic nature of
social cognition, the truth of the matter is that both accounts actually share certain core assump-
tions about the nature of the mind. Both deny that it is possible to experience other minds; both
Philosophical Explorations
Vol. 11, No. 3, September 2008, 237-244
Corresponding author. Email: dza@hum.ku.dk
ISSN 1386-9795 print/ISSN 1741-5918 online
# 2008 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/13869790802302306
http://www.informaworld.com

presuppose the fundamental opacity or invisibility of other minds. It is precisely because of the
absence of an experiential access to others that we need to rely on and employ either theoretical
inferences or internal simulations. Both accounts share the view that the minds of others are con-
cealed and hidden, and they consider one of the main challenges facing a theory of social cogni-
tion to be the question of how and why we ascribe such hidden mental entities or processes to
certain publicly observable bodies.
2.
Theory
Let us now turn to Herschbach's criticism, and ﬁrst consider his discussion of Zahavi's treatment
of theory theory. Herschbach claims that Zahavi's criticism of the theory theory approach to social
cognition is pitched at the personal level, and while he concedes that phenomenological evi-
dence is important in providing adequate personal level accounts, he also insists that it alone
is insufﬁcient to rule out that it might be sub-personal theorizing which enables social perception.
Even when a phenomenological investigation has come to an end, there is much about social
perception that still needs to be accounted for; in particular the sub-personal processes that
enable this perceptual experience of humans as embodied agents. According to Herschbach,
Zahavi simply doesn't provide any arguments against the possibility that these sub-personal pro-
cesses might be theoretical in nature, and as a consequence he doesn't really provide any argu-
ments against a sub-personal version of the theory theory. Let us return to the text in question,
namely chapter 7 of Zahavi's recent Subjectivity and Selfhood (2005).
Herschbach correctly notes that one of Zahavi's objections is that many theory-theorists have
tended to construe theory in a rather loose sense in order to increase the plausibility of their own
position, and thus the danger they have run is to become vulnerable to what Blackburn has
dubbed the 'promiscuity objection' (cf. Blackburn 1995). In the end, the notion of theory threa-
tens to become vacuous since everything turns out to be theoretical or quasi-scientiﬁc, including
cooking, gardening, ﬁshing, etc. Herschbach admits that some theory theorists have indeed
trivialized the concept of theorizing, but he then goes on to argue that others have been
quite diligent in specifying the structures and properties that cognitive mechanisms must
possess if they are to be classiﬁed as theoretical, and that that speciﬁcation is sufﬁcient to
counter the promiscuity objection. Somewhat surprisingly, Herschbach fails to mention that
Zahavi makes the very same point. After referring to the promiscuity objection, Zahavi writes
that some theory theorists have accepted a strong deﬁnition of theory in order to avoid the
objection. Among the features mentioned by Zahavi are explanatory and predictive power,
counterfactual projection, the introduction of unobservable entities, and the integration of infor-
mation within a small number of general principles. As is clear from the text that follows, which
Herschbach ignores, it is in particular the introduction of unobservable entities that is the focus of
Zahavi's argumentation. On Zahavi's reading, one of the most characteristic features of the theory
theory (be it in its personal or sub-personal version) is that it considers the attribution of mental
states to be a question of an inference to best explanation and prediction of behavioral data. It
consequently denies that we have any direct experience of mental states, and instead argues that
the concepts in question refer to unobservable and theoretically postulated entities. Thus, one of
the reasons why Premack and Woodruff originally argued that the ascription of mental states is a
theoretical activity was exactly because they took mental states to be unobservable entities that
we do not experience, but which we nevertheless use quite successfully to explain and predict
behaviour (Premack and Woodruff 1978). To put it differently, on this account, it is not merely
Dan Zahavi and Shaun Gallagher
238

the case that my access to minds is theoretically mediated. No, the point is rather that minds are
theoretical postulated entities.
A similar omission occurs later in the text. Herschbach refers to Zahavi's criticism of Uta Frith's
view of social cognition, and quotes Zahavi as saying that 'it would have been better to avoid
using the term "theory" when speaking of a non-conscious information processing mechanism'.
And that 'it is rather misleading to designate such non-conscious inferential processes as intui-
tive'. Herschbach's summary of Zahavi's argumentation ends here, and he omits the immediate
continuation of the text, where Zahavi writes:
These minor qualms aside, however, the decisive issue is the following: According to the theory-
theory, mental states, be they our own or those of others, are unobservable and theoretically postu-
lated entities. To argue in such a fashion is, however, to ignore the ﬁrst-personal givenness of the
experiential dimension and to disregard the way in which the life of the mind of others is visible in
their expressive behavior and meaningful action. (Zahavi 2005, 222)
The fact that Herschbach fails to include this passage in his summary suggests that he simply
missed the point and main thrust of Zahavi's criticism. Regardless of whether the purported
theorizing in question is personal or sub-personal, the decisive issue is whether or not there is
any aspect of the minds of others that are experientially accessible. Theory theory argues that
the mental life of others is invisible. We argue that such a claim is based on prior theoretical com-
mitments and on an impoverished notion of the mind, rather than on proper phenomenology.
A puzzling feature of Herschbach's argumentation is that he argues that the sub-personal
version of the theory theory should be able to accommodate the idea that our personal level
experience, rather than being experience of mere behaviour, is indeed of 'expressive behaviour',
and he admits that theory theory might need an enriched concept of mental states to accommo-
date this fact. But he goes on to suggest that the sub-personal processes producing such experi-
ence might still be theoretical. Why is this line of reasoning puzzling? Supposedly the theory
theory account has been developed in order to explain a certain cognitive achievement,
namely the move from the perception of observable behaviour to the attribution of unobservable
mental states. Depending on whether one opts for a personal level or a sub-personal level version
of the theory theory, opinions differ regarding the status of the cognitive step. On one reading, we
are dealing with a conscious inference, on a different reading we are dealing with unconscious
inferential processes. On both accounts however we are dealing with a kind of inference to
best explanation. Both accounts agree on the explanandum. If in contrast, we concede that
there is no move from the perception of behaviour to the attribution of mental states, but that
we rather perceive the mental life of others directly, we have not only departed from what we
would consider to be the deﬁning feature of the theory theory, we have also changed the expla-
nandum radically. To suggest that the explanatory power of the sub-personal level version of the
theory theory can remain unaffected by this change is to endorse a highly unusual view of the
relation between explanandum and explanans.
Let us assume that the theory theory isn't committed to the view that mental states are theor-
etically posited entities. Let us assume that it can actually concede that some mental states can
be experienced, and that there are ways of understanding the minds of others that are as phe-
nomenologically direct as our perception of medium-sized objects. Let us assume it is prepared
to say this much, but that it then simply adds that this direct experience, just like the direct
perceptual experience of various physical objects, is underpinned by and enabled by various
sub-personal cognitive mechanisms employing rule-based manipulations of symbolic represen-
tations (to take just one traditional account on offer). If this is what a sub-personal version of the
A Reply to Herschbach
239

theory theory amounts to - and again let us add that we consider this version to be quite differ-
ent from the ones currently on offer1 - is this then a version that we take ourselves to have con-
vincingly refuted? The short reply is no. There is a lot of work left to do, and we suggest that a lot
more work is required on the theory theory side of this issue as well. We do indeed think the
theory theory needs to offer more compelling evidence that the notion of a sub-personal
theory makes theoretical sense, but we should also note that our dissatisfaction with the
notion of sub-personal theorizing was never intended as a central element in our criticism of
the theory theory.
One ﬁnal remark regarding Herschbach's discussion of the theory theory. Herschbach men-
tions in passing that Onishi and Baillargeon's purported evidence of false belief understanding
in 15-month-olds might potentially collapse the alleged developmental gap between false
belief understanding and the understanding of emotions and intentions. Given recent evidence
suggesting that infants can respond appropriately to emotional expressions in others much
earlier, say, at 2-3 months of age (cf. Reddy 2008), there is still a long way to go if the gap is
to be closed.
3.
Simulation
Herschbach next turns his attention to Gallagher's critique of simulation theory, and speciﬁcally
implicit simulation theory. Again there is no quarrel concerning the personal level of conscious
experience, and Herschbach focuses on Gallagher's arguments against the sub-personal
version of simulation theory. Gallagher considers what has become the standard deﬁnition of
simulation in simulation theory and contends that on this deﬁnition simulation involves both
instrumental control via use of a model, and pretense. Herschbach accepts that 'Brain mechan-
isms do not use other brain mechanisms as representations or models in the same way
persons understand and use external representations and models' (229), but then goes on to
suggest that one might nevertheless speak of such an instrumental aspect at the sub-personal
level. More speciﬁcally, he appeals to Ramsey's (2007) defense of the notion of using models
as representations at the sub-personal level. The example that Ramsey and Herschbach appeal
to is one in which a pre-determined mechanical simulation (and we grant without argument
that one might appropriately call the S-shaped groove a simulation of the external track)
guides the movement of a car around a track. Although this is far aﬁeld from what a simulation
theorist would consider an implicit simulation, Herschbach wants to use this example to make a
terminological point - i.e., that the term 'use' can be appropriately used to describe ways in
which one part of a sub-personal system is related to another part. As he himself notes,
however, Gallagher doesn't object to this kind of description of sub-personal mechanisms for
motor control (see Gallagher 2007a, 263, note 10). In the context of simulation theory,
however, the concern is with a speciﬁc kind of instrumental use, one that is closely connected
with the pretense claim. On the standard deﬁnition of simulation, implicit simulation theory
would claim that at the sub-personal level the brain itself is proactively manipulating a model
by introducing off-line pretend states, not for purposes of online control of the organism's move-
ment, but in order to understand something else. As Gallagher has pointed out, the neuronal
systems at stake cannot involve pretense, and do not take the initiative; they are automatically
activated by the other person's action (2007a, 360).
In response to the linkage of simulation and pretense, Herschbach makes two moves. First he
observes rightly that each aspect of a simulation routine does not need to include the kind of
pretense that the standard view requires.
Dan Zahavi and Shaun Gallagher
240

But all simulated states need not be represented as being 'as if' they were another person's. Aspects of
a simulation process may go on without the identity of the agent (self vs. other) being explicitly rep-
resented. Just because the end result of this process must be categorized and attributed to an agent
does not mean all aspects of the purported simulation process must explicitly represent the agent in
question to count as simulations. (232)
While it is clear that some part of the system must be capable of agent discrimination (this is my
action vs. this is your action), it is not clear that the kind of pretense that simulation theory
describes happens anywhere in the system. For Herschbach, however, upon perceiving an
angry person, it would be sufﬁcient for simulation if the brain simply went into the state it
would be in 'if I were angry' (232). This, Herschbach claims 'is all the "pretense" needed by simu-
lation theory'. Yet it is difﬁcult to parse this out as pretense on the sub-personal level. The relevant
state of the system at the sub-personal level registers (1) anger - the mirror or matching aspect,
and (2) a particular agent - the agent discrimination aspect. There is still no 'as-if' registered in
the system.
It is precisely this kind of difﬁculty that motivates Goldman (2006) to follow a different strat-
egy. And this is also the second move that Herschbach makes. Following Goldman, Herschbach
suggests that one could opt for a more minimal concept of simulation that doesn't involve pre-
tense. As Goldman and Sripada write,
[. . .] we do not regard the creation of pretend states, or the deployment of cognitive equipment to
process such states, as essential to the generic idea of simulation. The general idea of simulation is
that the simulating process should be similar, in relevant respects, to the simulated process.
Applied to mindreading, a minimally necessary condition is that the state ascribed to the target is
ascribed as a result of the attributor's instantiating, undergoing, or experiencing, that very state. In
the case of successful simulation, the experienced state matches that of the target. (Goldman and
Sripada 2005, 208)
In short, on Goldman's view, neither pretend states nor the instrumental manipulation of such
states are essential to simulation since they are only to be found in high-level forms of mindread-
ing. Rather, it is the existence of matching states in target and attributor that makes the process
one of simulation.
The claim that our recognition of mental states in others presupposes the existence of
matching states in ourselves doesn't make much sense on the personal level. We might encoun-
ter a furious neighbour and become furious ourselves, but our understanding of our neighbour's
emotion might also elicit a very different response, namely the feeling of fear. In either case,
however, our emotional reaction is exactly that - a reaction. It is a consequence of our under-
standing of the other's emotion, and not a precondition or prerequisite for this understanding.
After all, how plausible is it to claim that I need to become furious myself, if I am to recognize
the fury in the face of my assailant. Quite often (perhaps most of the time), we move differently,
feel differently and think different thoughts than the people we perceive and with whom
we interact.
So the matching in question must be one that takes place between sub-personal states. But
how precisely do we deﬁne a neuronal state as being the same in this context? Given that the
brain functions in terms of neuronal assemblies which are 'built' according to temporal con-
straints (synchrony of action potentials), the 'same' neuronal activation slightly delayed, or
without the identical overlap (as we may ﬁnd in simple agent discrimination), may end up
forming an entirely different assembly, and having a different function (see Legrand 2007).
The fact that the same neuron ﬁres under more than one condition does not mean that the
A Reply to Herschbach
241

neural state is the same under all such conditions. Indeed, it turns out that mirror neuron acti-
vation does not always involve a precise match between motor system execution and observed
action. Csibra (2005) notes that conservatively, between 21 and 45% of neurons identiﬁed as
mirror neurons are sensitive to multiple types of action; of those activated by a single type
of observed action, that action is not necessarily the same action deﬁned by the motor proper-
ties of the neuron; approximately 60% of mirror neurons are 'broadly congruent', which means
there may be some relation between the observed action(s) and their associated executed
action, but not an exact match. Only about one-third of mirror neurons show a one-to-one
congruence.2 Newman-Norlund et al. (2007, 55) suggest that activation of the broadly congru-
ent mirror neurons may represent a complementary action rather than a similar action. In that
case such activation could not constitute simulations even on the minimal deﬁnition (Gallagher
2007b, 2008).
Whereas it is relatively easy to understand what is meant by simulation as long as the term
denotes personal-level processes, the use of the term to denote sub-personal processes might
increase the plausibility of the claim that simulation routines are pervasive but at the cost of
making the meaning of the term quite unclear. Why speak of the involved sub-personal processes
in terms of simulation, and not rather in terms of, say, resonance mechanisms that form part of
the sensory-motor system of social perception? The latter phrasing would avoid the misleading
connotations of the former.
4.
Conclusion
In his discussion Herschbach frequently uses the term 'social perception' and seems to concede
that it is possible to perceive some aspects of the mental life of others. We think this is a move in
the right direction. The crucial question, though, is whether it is best to try to accommodate this
insight by turning to either theory theory or simulation theory, established theories that hold
onto the idea that social cognition is primarily a matter of inference to invisible minds, or
whether one should rather dismiss the forced choice between theory theory and simulation
theory as a false choice and instead opt for a new kind of theory that challenges this Cartesian
understanding of the mental.3 Our view is that social perception plays an important role in
such an alternative second-person approach to interpersonal understanding that emphasizes
interaction, context, and narrative (cf. Gallagher and Zahavi 2008).
Notes
1.
It is true that some theory theorists have argued that after we have reached a certain expertise in mind-
reading our experience may be of seeing things directly, although what we see is actually the result of a
complex theoretical process. We continue to theorize, but our expertise (our well-formed habit) makes us
unaware of the inferential processes involved and makes us believe that our experience is immediate and
non-inferential. But in order to reach this step, we have to start as novices wherein we are unable to see
others as minded, and this makes their proposal quite different from Herschbach's.
2.
Csibra concludes: 'With strongly unequal distribution of types of action or types of grip, one could ﬁnd a
relatively high proportion of good match between the [observed action vs executed action] domains
even if there were no causal relation between them. Without such a statistical analysis, it remains uncer-
tain whether the cells that satisfy the deﬁnition of "mirror neurons" (i.e., the ones that discharge both
with execution and observation of actions) do indeed have "mirror properties" in the everyday use of
this term (i.e., are generally activated by the same action in both domains)' (2005, 3).
Dan Zahavi and Shaun Gallagher
242

3.
It is no coincidence that Goldman considers a more apt name for the simulation process to be simulation-
plus-projection (Goldman 2006, 40). We obviously recognize that simulationism is something of an
umbrella term, and that quite a few simulationists (including Gordon and Heal) would distance them-
selves from what they consider to be Goldman's overly Cartesian construal of simulation. However,
our criticism is general in nature and is directed at any version of simulation theory insofar as it 1)
aims to account for our most basic understanding of other minds, and 2) takes simulation to involve imi-
tation, projection or imagination.
Notes on contributors
Dan Zahavi is Professor of Philosophy and Director of the Danish National Research Foundation's
Center for Subjectivity Research at the University of Copenhagen. In his systematic work, Zahavi
has mainly been investigating the nature of selfhood, self-consciousness and intersubjectivity. He
is co-editor of the journal Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences. His most important publi-
cations include Husserl und die transzendentale Intersubjektivita¨t (Kluwer, 1996), Self-awareness
and Alterity (Northwestern University Press, 1999), Husserl's Phenomenology (Stanford University
Press, 2003), Subjectivity and Selfhood (MIT Press, 2005), and together with Shaun Gallagher
The Phenomenological Mind (Routledge, 2008).
Shaun Gallagher is Professor of Philosophy and Cognitive Sciences at the University of Central
Florida and Research Professor of Philosophy and Cognitive Science at the University of Hertford-
shire. He has held visiting positions at the Ecole Normale Supe´rieure, Lyon, the University of
Copenhagen, and the Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge. His recent books include
How the Body Shapes the Mind (Oxford University Press, 2005); and with Dan Zahavi, The Phenom-
enological Mind (Routledge, 2008). He is co-editor of the journal Phenomenology and the Cognitive
Sciences, and recently co-edited Does Consciousness Cause Behavior? An Investigation of the Nature
of Volition (MIT, 2006).
References
Blackburn, S. 1995. Theory, observation and drama. In Folk psychology: The theory of mind debate, ed.
M. Davies and T. Stone, 274-90. Oxford: Blackwell.
Csibra, G. 2005. Mirror neurons and action observation. Is simulation involved? ESF Interdisciplines. http://
www.interdisciplines.org/mirror/papers/.
Gallagher, S. 2007a. Simulation trouble. Social Neuroscience 2, no. 3-4: 353-65.
———. 2007b. Logical and phenomenological arguments against simulation theory. In Folk Psychology
Re-assessed, ed. D. Hutto and M. Ratcliffe, 63-78. Dordrecht: Springer Publishers.
———. 2008 . Neural simulation and social cognition. In Mirror neuron systems: The role of mirroring processes
in social cognition, ed. J.A. Pineda. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press.
Gallagher, S., and D. Zahavi. 2008. The phenomenological mind. London: Routledge.
Goldman, A.I. 2006. Simulating minds: The philosophy, psychology and neuroscience of mindreading. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Goldman, S., and C.S. Sripada. 2005. Simulationist models of face-based emotion recognition. Cognition 94:
193-213.
Herschbach, Mitchell. 2008. Folk psychological and phenomenological accounts of social perception. Philo-
sophical Explorations 11, no. 3: 223-35.
Legrand, D. 2007. Naturalizing the acting self: Subjective vs. anonymous agency. Philosophical Psychology 20,
no. 4: 457-78.
A Reply to Herschbach
243

Newman-Norlund, R.D., M.L. Noordzij, R.G.J. Meulenbroek, and H. Bekkering. 2007. Exploring the brain basis
of joint attention: Co-ordination of actions, goals and intentions. Social Neuroscience 2, no. 1: 48-65.
Premack, D., and G. Woodruff. 1978. Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind? Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 4: 515-26.
Reddy, V. 2008. How infants know minds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Zahavi, D. 2005. Subjectivity and selfhood: Investigating the ﬁrst-person perspective. Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press.
———. 2008. Simulation, projection and empathy. Consciousness and Cognition 17: 514-22.
Dan Zahavi and Shaun Gallagher
244

