Indo-Paciﬁc Journal of Phenomenology
ISSN: 2079-7222 (Print) 1445-7377 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/ripj20
'The Individual in the World - The World in
the Individual': Towards a Human Science
Phenomenology that Includes the Social World
Karin Dahlberg
To cite this article: Karin Dahlberg (2006) 'The Individual in the World - The World in the
Individual': Towards a Human Science Phenomenology that Includes the Social World, Indo-
Paciﬁc Journal of Phenomenology, 6:sup1, 1-9, DOI: 10.1080/20797222.2006.11433932
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/20797222.2006.11433932
Published online: 01 Aug 2006.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 534
View related articles 
Citing articles: 6 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ripj20

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology, Volume 6, Special Edition 
August 2006  
Page 1 of 9 
 
 
 
 
'The Individual in the World - The World in the Individual': 
 Towards a Human Science Phenomenology that Includes the Social World 
 
by Karin Dahlberg 
 
 
Abstract 
 
Human science researchers tend to be targeted for critique on the grounds that their approach is 
too individualistic to take due cognisance of societal and political influences. What is accordingly 
advocated is that the phenomenological and so-called romantic theories should be abandoned in 
favour of analytic or continental theories that have as their main focus the system, the group, the 
society, and the various influences of the social world on the existential reality of the individual. 
 
Without trying to invalidate these social science strategies, this paper attempts to show that it is 
not necessary to surrender phenomenology in order to understand not only the individual, but also 
the social world in which individuals live. It is argued that the desired goal of a less 
individualistic human science's theoretical basis can still be founded in phenomenology, in that 
Merleau-Ponty's philosophy, which has its origin in Husserlian phenomenology, provides us with 
an adequate ontology for understanding human existence more comprehensively. Merleau-Ponty's 
ontological philosophy elucidates the in-between world, that structure of existence where the 
individual cannot be separated from her/his world context. In his exploration of the reversibility of 
existence, Merleau-Ponty demonstrates that there is no ontological gulf between the individual 
and the social world. Instead, the world is 'in' the individual as much as the individual is 'in' the 
world. With this phenomenological epistemology, it is argued, it is possible to generate research 
that is capable "of more than a frozen existence", as Merleau-Ponty puts it. 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
As human science researchers, every now and then 
we become targets of critique centred on the charge 
that we are too individualistic to be duly cognizant of 
societal and political influences. We are advised to let 
go of the phenomenological and so-called romantic 
theories in favour of analytic - or, for that matter, 
continental - theories that have as their main focus the 
system, the group, the society, and the various 
influences of the social world on individual existence.  
 
Without trying to invalidate these social science 
strategies, I want to show that the desired goal of a 
less individualistic human science's theoretical basis 
can still be founded in phenomenology. I argue that 
Merleau-Ponty's philosophy, which originated in 
Husserlian phenomenology, provides us with an 
ontology that very adequately serves as the 
foundation for understanding human existence, and 
how we always are to our world, as Merleau-Ponty 
puts it. His writings make clear that his ontological 
philosophy, far from being anthropology, is what we 
need in order to understand the in-between world, that 
structure of existence where the individual cannot be 
separated from her/his world context. On the contrary, 
Merleau-Ponty provides adequate evidence of how 
the world is in the individual as much as the 
 
The IPJP is a joint project of Rhodes University in South Africa and Edith Cowan University in Australia. This document is subject to 
copyright and may not be reproduced in whole or in part via any medium (print, electronic or otherwise) without the express permission of the 
publishers. 
 
The Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology (IPJP) can be found at www.ipjp.org. 
 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology, Volume 6, Special Edition 
August 2006  
Page 2 of 9 
 
individual is in the world. He clearly shows that the 
very idea of separating 'absence' from 'presence' is 
false, and that, in order to understand these aspects of 
existence, we must relate them to each other, seeing 
them as aspects of the "flesh of the world". The 
epistemology that is needed when we want to 
consider human science as social science is to be 
found 
in 
Merleau-Ponty's 
exploration 
of 
the 
reversibility of existence. 
 
When I embarked on this paper, my aim was to make 
explicit how human science researchers, based in 
phenomenology, can use "observation" as a means to 
find implicit and bodily-embedded knowledge, 
instead of practising only "chair interviewing". 
However, as this project progressed, I found that the 
answers went beyond the initial question, and 
consequently 
this 
paper 
addresses 
not 
only 
observational research, but epistemological questions 
in human science research in general. What is implied 
is that answering questions about observation at the 
same time means answering questions about how we 
as humans relate to our world. And answering 
questions about how we as humans relate to our world 
means answering questions about observation. 
 
The Connectedness of Existence 
 
Having worked with phenomenological philosophy 
for quite some years, I easily found preliminary 
answers to the question of how observation can be a 
means to access implicit knowledge, as well as to the 
question of individuals' relationship to the social 
world in phenomenological ontology, and more 
specifically in the connectedness of existence. 
Everything that is, is so because of everything else 
that exists. All of us, all our experiences, all my 
thoughts, your thoughts "and the thoughts of others 
are caught up in the fabric of one sole being", as 
Merleau-Ponty (1948/1968, p. 110) says. We all 
belong to being as "flesh of the world", connected 
with everything and everyone. When we live, talk or 
act, we do that with all that we are; "everyone speaks, 
all live and gesticulate within being" (ibid., p. 119). 
This being, the flesh of the world, which connects all 
and everything, is "thick" and very much present in 
what is and what happens, but at the same time it is 
"silent" and "invisible". And we have to try and learn 
to see the invisible, to listen to that which is silent; we 
have to disclose  
 
... Being that is not posited because it has 
no need to be, because it is silently behind 
all our affirmations, negations, and even 
behind all formulated questions; not that it 
is a matter of imprisoning it in our chatter, 
but because philosophy is the reconversion 
of silence and speech into one another: "It 
is the experience ... still mute which we 
are concerned with leading to the pure 
expression of its own meaning." (Merleau-
Ponty, 1948/1968, p. 129, citing Husserl, 
1929) 
 
Being, the invisible and mute fabric of meaning, is the 
background against which phenomena and their 
meanings have the possibility of standing out as 
figures. 
Consequently, 
the 
visible 
cannot 
be 
understood without its invisible side, in the same way 
as the invisible cannot be understood without the 
visible figure, now as background. This insight 
constitutes the basis of Merleau-Ponty's philosophy, 
and it has the power to form our understanding of 
human science research. 
 
In this paper I draw on the explicit ideas initially put 
forward by Merleau-Ponty. However, on reading 
Husserl, we find the notion of an existential 
connectedness that obviously inspired Merleau-Ponty. 
In the quotation above, Merleau-Ponty refers to 
Husserl's Cartesian Meditations. Further, Husserl 
explores "being in the world" (Husserl, 1913/1998, p. 
7), and he puts forward the idea that "No thing has its 
individuality in itself" (Husserl, 1928/2000, p. 313). 
He further argues that the lifeworld and intentionality 
are characterized by their open horizons (Husserl, 
1936/1970, 1920-25/2001).  
 
It thus seems that phenomenology offers an 
ambiguous, but nevertheless well founded and well 
explored, notion of "the flesh of the world", and that 
this is what we need to build upon when we move 
further into the realms of human science research and 
begin to explore the relationship between the 
individual and the social, and, at the same time, the 
idea of observation. However, in the light of the 
insight that everything is connected, we face new 
problems: how is it at all possible to see, understand 
and make explicit any part of this big web? How can 
we as researchers understand something that we also 
are part of? 
 
To Be Distant and Come Closer 
 
In order to see the world, its phenomena and its 
meanings, in order to let the world of meanings speak 
and to listen in, we can and we must take a step back 
(Merleau-Ponty, 1948/1968). By slackening "the 
threads of meaning", we create a distance from the 
world, in order not to be absorbed by it and take for 
granted that which seems so commonplace and well 
known (Merleau-Ponty, 1945/1995). We know from 
everyday experience that sometimes we don't see 
clearly because we are too close to the phenomenon 
 
The IPJP is a joint project of Rhodes University in South Africa and Edith Cowan University in Australia. This document is subject to 
copyright and may not be reproduced in whole or in part via any medium (print, electronic or otherwise) without the express permission of the 
publishers. 
 
The Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology (IPJP) can be found at www.ipjp.org. 
 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology, Volume 6, Special Edition 
August 2006  
Page 3 of 9 
 
in focus. Being in the midst of a big city we see some 
details of it, its streets, some buildings, and some 
people who are there, but we don't see the big lines of 
the city, its proportions or its size, or, for example, 
how far it is from the sea. To come to that 
understanding we need to find a distant outlook, a 
place from where we have a view that allows for the 
big lines. In the same way, we need a distance from a 
sheet with text, for being too close the sight is blurred 
and the text makes no sense. On the other hand, being 
too far away, we also can't see what we look for, 
whether the phenomenon is a city or a text.  
 
The answer to the question as to whether we should 
be close or distant in relation to the phenomenon that 
we investigate is the typical one for phenomenology: 
it is not either-or, but both-and. To understand 
lifeworld phenomena we must be distant and close, 
sometimes at the same time. Phenomenologically 
inspired research implies that we never stand still, but 
keep on moving. We move with the phenomena and 
their meanings, and move between figures and 
backgrounds. We even have to interchange figures 
and backgrounds: as soon as there is something that 
becomes visible to us we must also try to see the 
invisible side; when seeing a figure against a 
particular background, we have to turn it around and 
view the background, or parts of it, as figure, against 
the earlier figure, now as background. We must dwell 
with the phenomenon in order to find the way that 
best supports the meanings to be made explicit. 
 
We now begin to see that there is never one right 
distance or perspective. Merleau-Ponty (1948/1968, 
1945/1995) showed us that meanings are infinite and 
contextual (Dahlberg, 2006). Consequently, our focus 
as researchers must be on how we choose our 
viewpoints, outlooks, distances and perspectives 
when we try to understand something, and how we 
make phenomena and their meanings explicit. We 
must adopt an awareness that encourages us to "step 
back" from the immediate involvement with the 
world, but in a way that at the same time brings us 
closer to its meanings (cf. Gadamer, 1960/1995).  
 
To use observation as a means of accessing research 
data is one way to practise what we now know about 
the existential network. The method of observation 
seems to accord with the aim of investigating 
phenomena that are embedded and implicit, and 
therefore hard to access, as well as hard to verbalise. 
 
When we as researchers observe, we participate in the 
phenomenal events when the phenomenon is alive 
and 'in action'. 
 
 
Participation in Phenomenal Events 
 
It can be seen from two projects in which the notion 
of observation was implemented how observation as 
direct participation in phenomenal events can 
contribute meanings that may not become apparent in, 
for example, the process of interviewing. In these two 
empirical examples, as well as in a third one, we can 
see that participation in phenomenal events provides a 
means by which we can illuminate both the individual 
and the social world. In the first two examples, we 
can see the need to be empirically open to embodied, 
embedded knowledge. The second and, in particular, 
the third examples also show how the social world 
presents itself. 
 
In a research project (Dahlberg, 1997), I participated 
in a physiotherapeutic practice with the aim of 
understanding how patients with muscular-skeletal 
illnesses benefited from the care, which was founded 
in an approach focusing on self-training. The idea was 
that these patients' suffering is best reduced by their 
exercises in a "physiotherapy gym" on a regular basis. 
Besides the participation, I also conducted individual 
interviews with patients. While the interviewing 
elucidated important meanings of the care, it was in 
the observation of the patients in the physio-
therapeutic setting that I could grasp the importance 
of the exercises for their sense of embodiedness and 
"bodily balance", meanings that were made explicit 
by their movements and other bodily, not least facial, 
expressions. In the dressing room, I could also listen 
to the female patients' immediate and spontaneous 
comments following the exercises, which gave me 
access to important experiences and insights about the 
meaning of this particular form of care. 
 
In another project (Wireklint Sundström, 2005), this 
time focusing on emergency care, the researcher 
found in the participative part of her research that the 
smooth, often wordless, co-working between two 
ambulance carers was of extreme importance, 
something that was not mentioned at all in the 
interviews that she had conducted with them. Our 
understanding of this was that the meaning of their 
togetherness, the co-operation of the colleagues, is 
embedded and hidden in the ambulance care. The 
ambulance carers' dependence on each other is so 
crucial, but also so taken for granted, that they don't 
come to speak of it. They might not even have words 
for the depth of the meanings of their communion. 
The researcher, who could adopt a more distanced 
perspective than the carers, could see patterns that 
were invisible to those more directly involved.  
 
In both the projects referred to above, the research 
included observation, and meanings, invisible in other 
 
The IPJP is a joint project of Rhodes University in South Africa and Edith Cowan University in Australia. This document is subject to 
copyright and may not be reproduced in whole or in part via any medium (print, electronic or otherwise) without the express permission of the 
publishers. 
 
The Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology (IPJP) can be found at www.ipjp.org. 
 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology, Volume 6, Special Edition 
August 2006  
Page 4 of 9 
 
sources of data, were elicited. However, a similar 
outcome was evident in a project where we aimed at 
understanding the violent encounter in psychiatric 
care (Carlsson, 2004; Carlsson et al., 2006), and 
where we, due to ethical reasons, chose interviewing 
as the main means of eliciting data. Unlike earlier 
research, which has focused upon the aggressive 
patients, these findings show that "violent encounter" 
is not a phenomenon in itself, but something that 
exists in relation to the more general care; the violent 
encounter is very much of the care. We could very 
clearly see the patients' existential fragility that came 
into play when they wanted contact with carers in 
order to get relief from anxiety, which otherwise 
could result in an outburst of aggression. However, it 
happened instead that patients were met by carers that 
avoided them and their suffering. The patients in our 
study expressed how acutely they sensed that they 
were on a different level from the carers, who 
sometimes demonstrated their superiority, that they 
are in charge, for example by rattling the bunch of 
keys, or by not allowing patients to have the door 
unlocked, but forcing them to beg for it. The patients 
also expressed the view that carers prefer to spend 
time with each other rather than being with the 
patients. From the point of view of the patients, the 
focus of the carer is other carers, the care that the 
patients seek is given to other carers. The patients are 
left on the outside looking in, excluded from, and 
without being able to participate in, the community of 
carers. In our analysis we saw how the violent 
encounters 
are 
potentiated 
by 
care 
that 
is 
characterized by non-caring, escaping carers, and care 
that is not primarily aimed at the well-being of the 
patients and their lives. An especially forceful factor 
precipitating the occurrence of the violence is the 
relationship between the characteristics of the 
psychiatric care which structure its form.  
 
In this latter project in particular, but also in the other 
two projects described, it is evident how well the 
particular meanings of the phenomena studied were 
found to stand out as figures against the contexts as 
backgrounds. The embodied experiences of the 
physiotherapeutic care, the co-operation of the 
ambulance carers, as well as the violent encounter in 
psychiatric care, are explicit examples of phenomena 
that must be understood in their contexts. 
 
The above-mentioned experiences indicate that, for 
some research projects, "chair interviewing" is not 
enough. In order to illuminate phenomena of the 
lifeworld that are characterised by embodied and 
embedded meanings, researchers must be willing to 
participate directly in such phenomenal events that 
display the depth of the phenomenon and its contexts. 
Through research participation in phenomenal events, 
we gain information that is difficult to discover in 
conventional interview situations: we can see 
interactions and communication taking place before 
us, we can see people's behaviour, their gestures and 
other embodied expressions, in a direct relationship 
with the phenomenon that we aim at understanding.  
 
The meanings of the phenomenon "violent encounter" 
could, however, be illuminated by research that was 
based on interviews. Ethical considerations became 
obstacles for the research to include more direct 
participation in the phenomenal events. Exploring 
how that project was accomplished we can conclude, 
firstly, that the main researcher in this project is a 
very skilled interviewer. Secondly, an important 
reason for the multi-faceted findings that emerged, 
despite the lack of direct participation, was the use of 
re-enactment interviewing, where implementing a 
form of psycho-drama enabled us to get closer to the 
lived, embodied and contextual experience (Carlsson 
et al., 2002; Drew, 1993). Re-enactment interviewing 
can be understood as an in-between means of doing 
research, 
which 
bears 
characteristics 
of 
both 
interviewing and direct participation in phenomenal 
events. It seems to have the power of opening up 
embodied experiences and concretely supports the 
interview aim to intentionally move between different 
temporal and spatial dimensions.  
 
However, we have learnt from life that, at the same 
time as we gain something, we also lose something; 
with the "pro" come the "cons". Let us get ready for 
one more methodological challenge: how to deal with 
"the more".  
 
Taking Care of "The More"  
 
Through what I describe above as direct participation 
in phenomenal events, we gain access to meanings 
embedded in the relationship between the phenomena 
and their contexts. At the same time, we encounter 
other problems, of a kind not encountered in the same 
way in, for example, interviewing. In particular, there 
are two kinds of problems which exist in all research, 
but that become especially obvious in the process of 
observation as direct participation in phenomenal 
events: 
 
● 
there are many more intentional objects than the 
phenomenon;  
● 
it is the researcher who words the experiences.  
 
Finally, as a phenomenological approach to "the 
more", I suggest that it is of importance 
 
● 
to "bridle" the evolving understanding in order 
not to get "too much". 
 
The IPJP is a joint project of Rhodes University in South Africa and Edith Cowan University in Australia. This document is subject to 
copyright and may not be reproduced in whole or in part via any medium (print, electronic or otherwise) without the express permission of the 
publishers. 
 
The Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology (IPJP) can be found at www.ipjp.org. 
 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology, Volume 6, Special Edition 
August 2006  
Page 5 of 9 
 
Intentional Objects Exceed the Phenomenon  
In all human science research, and especially in 
participative research, there is always "the more" to 
it, as Gendlin says (see Todres, 2004). Central to the 
phenomenological understanding of the lifeworld is 
the awareness that we always speak from somewhere, 
from where we are situated in the midst of life 
(Husserl, 1936/1970; Merleau-Ponty, 1948/1968). As 
mentioned earlier, being human means that we are 
always already involved in a world, and connected 
with everything else that exists, prior to starting to 
reflect on our existence. There is thus always a 
surplus of meaning in all analysis.  
 
The surplus of meaning must first of all be understood 
as a rich contribution to the development of new 
understanding in research. It is through this that we 
see the variations and nuances of meanings, and, 
consequently, patterns of meaning (Dahlberg, 2006). 
However, the surplus of meaning is also a 
problematic and challenging aspect of research, in 
that we run the risk of getting not only "the more" but 
"too much". I remember well the interview of a 
former PhD student, in which the informant, who was 
supposed to talk about the phenomenon of "rest", 
instead extensively described his fantastic lawn-
mower. The risk of getting too much obviously exists 
in interviews, but seems to be more serious in 
observation as phenomenal participation, where we 
cannot "delimit an area of interest" as we can in 
interviews by directing questions (cf. Gadamer, 
1960/1995). In observation we get "the whole 
picture" - for better or for worse. And how, then, can 
we sort out what meanings there are, and distinguish 
what meanings belong to the focal phenomenon, the 
figure, and what meanings belong to the background? 
 
Practising phenomenology, we have already given up 
the positivistic idea of pure, objectivistic observation, 
which is never the case, neither in human science nor 
in natural science. We learned from Husserl's early 
theory, present in all his philosophy, how we always 
experience something as something, something that 
has meaning for us. Merleau-Ponty (1969/1991b) 
presents a compelling example in his text about 
indirect language, drawing on Malraux, illustrating 
how we already in perception stylise our experience, 
and how "thick" with meaning it is: 
 
A woman passing by is not first and 
foremost a corporeal contour for me, a 
coloured mannequin, a spectacle in a given 
spot. She is "an individual, sentimental, 
sexual expression". She is flesh in its full 
presence, with its vigour and weakness 
there in her walk or the click of her heel on 
the ground. She is a unique way of varying 
the accent of feminine being and thus of 
human being. (p. 59) 
 
It is characteristic of the human gesture to signify 
beyond its simple factual existence and to inaugurate 
meaning. Furthermore, according to Merleau-Ponty 
(1969/1991b), all gestures "arise from a single 
syntax" (p. 80), and thus it follows, as Merleau-Ponty 
asserts, "that every gesture is comparable to all 
others" (p. 79). If I, for example, see a smile on 
another person's face, I assume first of all that it is 
not just a facial movement, but something that means 
that this person is happy in some way or another. 
Secondly, I can assume that this other person is happy 
in about the same way as I would be when having that 
smile on my face. On the one hand, the surplus of 
meaning in perception and its foundation in a single 
syntax thus implies that, as a bottom line, it is not a 
problem to understand another human. On the other 
hand, it also constitutes a problem for research, 
because we are not interested in any meaning. 
 
Merleau-Ponty (1948/1968) says about a recorded 
conversation: 
 
The conversation reproduced exactly is no 
longer what it was while we were living it. 
It lacks the presence of those who were 
speaking, the whole surplus of meaning 
yielded by the gestures and faces that 
especially 
give 
the 
impression 
of 
something happening, of a discovery and 
continuous innovation. The conversation 
no longer exists. It does not ramify in all 
directions - it is flattened out in the single 
dimension of sound. Instead of summoning 
our whole being, it does no more than 
touch us lightly by ear. (p. 65) 
 
Not least when researchers participate directly in 
phenomenal events, there is a great need to pay 
attention to all the nuances and the richness of 
meaning, which might vary with the perspectives and 
distances that the researchers adopt. Furthermore, 
researchers must be aware that meanings in a way 
belong to their context. We have to see particular 
phenomena in human science research together with 
their contexts. What this implies is that even the 
context, even "the more", must be seen as of the 
phenomenon.  
 
The Researcher Words the Experiences  
Following Merleau-Ponty (1948/1968), we can say 
that what we hope to see when we participate in 
phenomenal 
events 
is 
that 
which 
might 
be 
inaccessible, or at least hard to reach, by means of 
words, as mentioned above. However, running into 
 
The IPJP is a joint project of Rhodes University in South Africa and Edith Cowan University in Australia. This document is subject to 
copyright and may not be reproduced in whole or in part via any medium (print, electronic or otherwise) without the express permission of the 
publishers. 
 
The Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology (IPJP) can be found at www.ipjp.org. 
 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology, Volume 6, Special Edition 
August 2006  
Page 6 of 9 
 
the need sooner or later of having to translate into 
words what we observe, what we grasp by means of 
indirect language, we face the second problem that 
needs to be illuminated here. We must take a closer 
look at what Heidegger (1927/1998, p. 204) refers to 
as "the wordly" side of existence. 
 
Words help us understand existence and its meanings. 
One central aim of human science research is to 
verbalize the more or less silent and hidden parts of 
human existence. We put into words, explore and 
describe existential phenomena such as suffering, 
wellness, learning, alienation, anxiety and loneliness, 
along with their essences, their meanings and 
characteristics. In wording others' experiences, we 
may, as researchers, be in a position to highlight 
something meaningful about the phenomenon and the 
social world in which it is 'swimming'. However, 
"the more", the infiniteness that characterizes the 
lifeworld and its meaning, has also to do with the 
infiniteness of language. When we in our research 
describe a phenomenon through others' lived 
experience, we have to be aware that, while some 
words can lead us closer to a phenomenon and its 
meanings, other words can lead us away from it, even 
if in the dictionary they are presented as synonyms. 
(This is particularly evident when I as a Swede must 
communicate my research in English.)  
 
The arrival at this point gives rise to a question about 
whose words should be in play in research. In, for 
example, interviews, the interviewees are the ones 
who give words to their experiences, especially in 
phenomenologically directed interviews, where we 
support the interviewees to reflect upon their 
experience, to give several lived examples, and to 
deepen the perspective. The interviewees can be 
given the opportunity to carefully and sincerely 
choose the words with which to describe the 
phenomenon in question and their lived experience of 
it. In contrast, when we are participating directly in 
phenomenal events, our primary grasp of the lived 
phenomenon is gained not by means of words, but 
through watching people in, for example, their 
everyday living. Their bodily gestures and activities 
convey meaning that we can understand linguistically. 
However, it is then we, the researchers, that give 
words to the experiences, lived by the others but only 
displayed in front of us (cf. Merleau-Ponty, 
1945/1995). This is good, but not good enough. As 
researchers, aware of the meanings of the lived world, 
we need also to talk to the people we are observing. 
We need their narratives, their ways of wording their 
experiences, of living the phenomenon. While thus 
needing the words of those whose lived reality we 
aim to explicate, as researchers we still require highly 
developed language skills, in the sense that we must 
have words for, and be sensitive enough to nuances to 
describe, the full spectrum of meaning.  
 
If we as researchers are the ones that give words to 
the presumed lived experience, we must be aware that 
the concern is not only about the words with which 
we convey the lived world to readers of human 
science research reports, but also about how we word 
the meanings within the research. Merleau-Ponty 
(1964/1991a) argues that words bring out thoughts as 
much as thoughts lead to words. Some words will 
lead us closer to the phenomenon in question and its 
meanings, while other words will make us more 
remote. Consequently, we must pay attention to how 
we linguistically deal with data, which words we use 
and what meanings we allow them to illuminate. We 
must be alert to the risk that we might be too 
influenced by our own understanding of the 
phenomenon and use the words that are closest to us, 
and which, for example, we find comfortable enough 
to use. 
 
The Need to "Bridle" the Evolving Understanding 
The emphasis on the surplus of meanings and the 
linguistic aspects of participative research points to 
the 
necessity 
of 
"bridling" 
the 
evolving 
understanding, so that meanings do not come too 
carelessly or glibly, so that we do not make definite 
what is indefinite (Dahlberg & Dahlberg, 2003). We 
noted earlier how the approach to this closeness-
distance 
dilemma 
was 
best 
understood 
phenomenologically as a "movement with" the 
phenomenon, where we at the same time recognize 
the involvement with the investigated phenomenon 
and its meaning(s). This is what "bridling" of the 
evolving understanding basically means; it means to 
critically reflect upon the whole phenomenal event 
when meanings come into being. 
 
Summing up 
 
The social world and being is the invisible and mute 
fabric of meaning that is the background against 
which individuals and particular phenomena have the 
possibility of standing out as figures. It is our 
involvement in the world that constitutes the 
possibility for researchers to see and explicate the 
invisible, or to put into words that which is mute. On 
the other hand, it is the very same involvement that 
brings "the more" that also can bring "too much" to 
the research. 
  
Our direct access to the world makes us think that 
what we see is what it seems to be. Consequently, 
researchers 
need 
to 
"bridle" 
the 
evolving 
understanding so that their research captures "the 
more" without including "too much". 
 
The IPJP is a joint project of Rhodes University in South Africa and Edith Cowan University in Australia. This document is subject to 
copyright and may not be reproduced in whole or in part via any medium (print, electronic or otherwise) without the express permission of the 
publishers. 
 
The Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology (IPJP) can be found at www.ipjp.org. 
 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology, Volume 6, Special Edition 
August 2006  
Page 7 of 9 
 
In this paper I have attempted to show that we do not 
have to surrender phenomenology in order to 
understand not only the individual, but also the social 
world in which individuals live. Merleau-Ponty's 
philosophy of "the flesh of the world" teaches us that 
there is no ontological gulf between the individual 
and the social world. Instead, he argues that the world 
is in the individual as much as the individual is in the 
world. The lifeworld, the world as we live it, includes 
the visible and the invisible, as much as it includes the 
social world. However, the same philosophy teaches 
us that going to the things themselves and 
participating in the phenomenal events is not as easy 
as it perhaps sounds. We must learn how to come 
close enough to the phenomenon while at the same 
time being distant and reflective. We must be aware 
of the foundational need to "word" the lived 
experiences, at the same time as being aware of how 
easy it is to get lost in the infiniteness. We must want 
"the more" but beware of getting "too much". Finally, 
as indicated by Merleau-Ponty, but indeed also by 
Husserl, we must learn how to bridle the evolving 
understanding so that we do not make definite what is 
indefinite. 
 
The urge to choose 'the right' perspective, both close 
enough and distant enough, does not mean, as it may 
sound, to stand still. On the contrary, it means to keep 
on moving, sensitively following the phenomenon. In 
part, Merleau-Ponty's appreciation of Husserl arises 
from the fact that Husserl was the master of starting 
all over again, time after time. This is something we 
can learn from: when we see something, when we 
have reached an understanding, we must begin again, 
travel the road of trying to understand again and 
again. But mind, this is not a beginning all over again 
that brings us back to the same starting point, it is not 
about travelling the same road over and over again: it 
is a beginning that is a continuation. 
 
The IPJP is a joint project of Rhodes University in South Africa and Edith Cowan University in Australia. This document is subject to 
copyright and may not be reproduced in whole or in part via any medium (print, electronic or otherwise) without the express permission of the 
publishers. 
 
 
Summing up this analysis, we can conclude that the 
challenge for all researchers is to not let the 
conversation die - and, in particular, not to kill it. 
Applying Merleau-Ponty's (1948/1968) argument 
about art, we can say that research "must have the 
capacity for more than a frozen existence. It must 
have the capacity for a sublimated existence, one 
more true than truth itself" (p. 66). As researchers, we 
must thus be sensitive to the phenomenon in all its 
subtly nuanced revelation of itself and learn how to 
preserve and make visible the rich and thick meanings 
that are embedded in the flesh, that are the invisible 
flesh.  
 
____________
 
 
 
Acknowledgement 
 
I want to thank Professor Scott Churchill of Dallas University, Texas (USA), for the insights into the world of 
observation that he helped me to, and for his very helpful comments on a draft of this article. I also want to thank Les 
Todres of Bournemouth University (UK) and Helena Dahlberg of Göteborg University (Sweden) for their very 
valuable comments on the philosophical exploration within this article. 
 
 
 
About the Author 
 
Karin Dahlberg has been Professor of Caring Science in the School of Health Sciences and Social Work at Växjö 
University in Sweden since 2000. She has degrees in nursing (psychiatric care) and education, with her doctoral 
degree in pedagogy (educational theory/research). Växjö University's PhD programme in caring science, of which 
she is in charge, is an interdisciplinary programme, which developed from within the nursing profession, with its 
central focus on the patient's/client's perspective on his/her suffering and well-being, and the care and treatments 
received, as well as on patients'/clients' participation in their health and care. Professor Dahlberg also serves as the 
Scientific Leader of the Centre for Lifeworld Research. Her research is mostly in the area of continental 
epistemology, which serves as a source for the development of suitable research approaches to support analysis in the 
caring science field. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology (IPJP) can be found at www.ipjp.org. 
 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology, Volume 6, Special Edition 
August 2006  
Page 8 of 9 
 
References 
 
Ashworth, P., & Lucas, U. (1998). What is the 'world' of phenomenography? Scandinavian Journal of Educational 
Research, 42(4), 415-431. 
 
Carlsson, G., Drew, N., Dahlberg, K., & Lützen, K. (2002). Uncovering tacit knowledge in caring. Journal of 
Nursing Philosophy, 3, 144-151. 
 
Carlsson, G., Dahlberg, K., Lützen, K., & Nyström, M. (2004). Violent encounters in psychiatric care: A 
phenomenological study of embodied caring knowledge. Issues in Mental Health Nursing, 25, 191-217. 
 
Carlsson, G., Dahlberg, K., Dahlberg, H., & Ekebergh, M. (in press). Patients longing for authentic personal care: A 
phenomenological study of violent encounters in psychiatric settings. Issues in Mental Health Nursing. 
 
Dahlberg, K. (1997). Kroppen - vår tillgång till världen [The body as the access to a world]. Nordisk Fysioterapi, 1, 
10-14. 
 
Dahlberg, K. (2006). The essence of essences: The search for meaning structures in phenomenological analysis of 
lifeworld phenomena. International Journal of Qualitative Studies on Health and Well-being, 1(1), 11-19. 
 
Dahlberg, K., Drew, N., & Nyström, M. (2001). Reflective lifeworld research. Lund, Sweden: Studentlitteratur.  
 
Dahlberg, H., & Dahlberg, K. (2003). To not make definite what is indefinite: A phenomenological analysis of 
perception and its epistemological consequences. Journal of the Humanistic Psychologist, 31(4), 34-50. 
 
Dahlberg, K., Fryklund, B., Jacobson, L., & Jälthammar, Å. (1999). Får vårdtagarna det som vårdgivarna tror att de 
ger dem? En studie av rehabiliterande vård i hemmet [A health science study of rehabilitation in home-based 
care] (Research Report, No. 2). Sweden: School of Health Sciences, Borås University College. 
 
Drew, N. (1993). Reenactment interviewing: a methodology for phenomenological research. Image: Journal of 
Nursing scholarship, 25(4), 345-351. 
 
Gadamer, H-G. (1995). Truth and method (2nd rev. ed.) (J. Weinsheimer & D. Marshall, Trans.). New York: The 
Continuum Publishing Company. (Original work published 1960) 
 
Gadamer, H-G. (1996). The enigma of health (J. Gaiger & N. Walker, Trans.). Stanford, CA: Stanford University 
Press. (Original work published 1993) 
  
Giorgi, A. (1997). The theory, practice, and evaluation of the phenomenological method as a qualitative research 
procedure. Journal of Phenomenological Psychology, 28(2), 235-260. 
 
Heidegger, M. (1998) Being and Time (J. Macquarrie & E. Robinson, Trans.). Oxford, UK: Blackwell. (Original 
work published 1927) 
 
Husserl, E. (1970). The crisis of European sciences and transcendental phenomenology (D. Carr, Trans.). Evanston, 
IL: North Western University Press. (Original work published 1936)  
 
Husserl, E. (1973). Experience and judgement (J. S. Churchill & K. Ameriks, Trans.). Evanston, IL: North Western 
University Press. (Original work published 1948) 
 
Husserl, E. (1977). Cartesian meditations (D. Cairns, Trans.). The Hague, NL: Martinus Nijhoff. (Original work 
published 1929) 
 
Husserl, E. (1998). Ideas pertaining to a pure phenomenology and to a phenomenological philosophy. First book (F. 
Kersten, Trans.). London, UK: Kluwer Academic Publication. (Original work published 1913) 
  
 
The IPJP is a joint project of Rhodes University in South Africa and Edith Cowan University in Australia. This document is subject to 
copyright and may not be reproduced in whole or in part via any medium (print, electronic or otherwise) without the express permission of the 
publishers. 
 
The Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology (IPJP) can be found at www.ipjp.org. 
 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology, Volume 6, Special Edition 
August 2006  
Page 9 of 9 
 
Husserl, E. (2000). Ideas pertaining to a pure phenomenology and to a phenomenological philosophy. Second book 
(R. Rojcewicz & A. Schuwer, Trans.). London, UK: Kluwer Academic Publication. (Original work published 
1928) 
  
Husserl (2001). Analyses concerning passive and active synthesis. Lectures on transcendental logic (A. J. Steinbock, 
Trans.). London, UK: Kluwer Academic Publication. (Original work published 1920-1925) 
 
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1964a). The primacy of perception and its philosophical consequences. In The primacy of 
perception (J. Edie, Trans.). Evanston, IL: North Western University Press. (Original work published 1946) 
 
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1964b). Eye and mind. In The primacy of perception (J. Edie, Trans.). Evanston, IL: North 
Western University Press. (Original work published 1961) 
 
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1968). The visible and the invisible (A. Lingis, Trans). Evanston, IL: North Western University 
Press. (Original work published 1948) 
 
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1987). Signs (R. McCleary, Trans.). Evanston, IL: North Western University Press. (Original 
work published 1960) 
 
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1991a). Consciousness and the acquisition of language (H. Silverman, Trans.). Evanston, IL: 
North Western University Press. (Original work published 1964) 
 
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1991b). The prose of the world (J. O'Neill, Trans.). Evanston, IL: North Western University 
Press. (Original work published 1969) 
 
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1995). Phenomenology of perception (C. Smith, Trans.). Routledge, London, UK. (Original 
work published 1945) 
 
Merleau-Ponty, M. (2004). The world of perception (O. Davies, Trans.). London, UK: Routledge. (Original work 
published 1948) 
 
Natanson, M. (1973). Edmund Husserl: Philosopher of infinite tasks. Evanston, IL: North Western University Press. 
 
Todres, L. (2004). The meaning of understanding and the open body: Some implications for qualitative research. 
Existential Analysis, 15(1), 38-54. 
 
Wireklint Sundström, B. (2005). Förberedd på att vara oförberedd: En fenomenologisk studie av vårdande 
bedömning och dess lärande i ambulanssjukvård [Prepared to be unprepared: A phenomenological study of 
assessment with a caring approach and how it can be learned in the ambulance services]. (Research Report, No. 
64). Växjö, Sweden: Växjö University Press. 
 
 
 
_____________________ 
 
The IPJP is a joint project of Rhodes University in South Africa and Edith Cowan University in Australia. This document is subject to 
copyright and may not be reproduced in whole or in part via any medium (print, electronic or otherwise) without the express permission of the 
publishers. 
 
The Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology (IPJP) can be found at www.ipjp.org. 
 

