Indo-Paciﬁc Journal of Phenomenology
ISSN: 2079-7222 (Print) 1445-7377 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/ripj20
Phenomenology and Meaning Attribution
Max van Manen
To cite this article: Max van Manen (2017) Phenomenology and Meaning Attribution, Indo-
Paciﬁc Journal of Phenomenology, 17:1, 1-12, DOI: 10.1080/20797222.2017.1368253
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/20797222.2017.1368253
© 2017 The Author(s).
Published online: 26 Sep 2017.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 14700
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 18 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ripj20

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology 
 Volume 17, Edition 1 
 July 2017 
 Page 1 of 12 
ISSN (online) : 1445
ISSN (online) : 1445
ISSN (online) : 1445
ISSN (online) : 1445----7377
7377
7377
7377
ISSN (print) : 2079
ISSN (print) : 2079
ISSN (print) : 2079
ISSN (print) : 2079----7222
7222
7222
7222
© The Author(s). This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0]. 
The IPJP is published in association with NISC (Pty) Ltd and Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
www.ipjp.org 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/20797222.2017.1368253 
Review Essay 
Phenomenology and Meaning Attribution 
John Paley. (2017). Phenomenology as Qualitative Research: A Critical Analysis of Meaning Attribution. London & 
New York: Routledge. 
Hard Cover (198 pages). ISBN: 978-1-138-65281-1 
Cost: USA $160.00; UK £95.00 
by Max van Manen 
Phenomenology is a philosophy based form of inquiry 
with a long tradition that may be both confusing and 
disorienting to academic and clinical practitioners who 
are interested in understanding and doing research in 
professional fields such as nursing, medicine, clinical 
psychology, pedagogy, psychotherapy and education. 
Increasingly, the term "phenomenology" occurs in a 
broad range of qualitative texts and publications. Some 
think that any study that deals with "experience" is, as 
such, therefore phenomenological. But that is, of course, 
misleading, many other qualitative methodologies also 
being concerned with human experiences. The complex 
calibre of phenomenological scholarship in philosophy, 
human science and professional fields has given rise to 
research practices that prompt some to ask: "But is it 
phenomenology?" "Is this approach still phenomenology 
in its original sense?" In my long university teaching 
career, I have found that misunderstandings and critical 
questions of students of phenomenology often are the 
most appropriate starting points for discussing, expli-
cating and clarifying the methodological issues of 
phenomenological inquiry. Responding to critique is 
also an effective context for addressing underlying issues 
and controversies of method and research. With these 
considerations in mind, I engage here in an essay review 
of John Paley's recently published Phenomenology as 
Qualitative Research: A Critical Analysis of Meaning 
Attribution (2017). I hope that my discussion and the 
examples provided below assist in a proper appreciation 
of phenomenological thought and practice. 
In his Phenomenology as Qualitative Research [PQR], 
John Paley constructs a lengthy critique of phenomen-
ological method as practised by Amedeo Giorgi, Max 
van Manen, and Jonathan Smith. Paley states that the 
tool of his critical analysis is "meaning attribution". He 
says, "I will scrutinize examples of meaning attribution 
in the work of PQR methodologists in order to get a 
clearer answer to the question 'How is it done?'" (2017, 
p. 27). Meaning attribution is a psychological method
rooted in Fritz Heider's (1958) The Psychology of
Interpersonal Relations. Attribution theory studies the
psychological processes that influence perceptions of
meaning. Paley's employment of meaning attribution,
throughout his book, produces a huge heap of screeds
that he accumulates in his aim to criticize what he
perceives are faulty uses of phenomenological methods.
For the sake of clarification, I will show that meaning
attribution is an inappropriate tool for the purpose, in
that it has nothing to do with phenomenological method.
I will also show that John Paley misunderstands the
basic philosophical nature of phenomenological meaning
and inquiry, and that he not only has Edmund Husserl
wrong (as demonstrated by Amedeo Giorgi, 2017), but
that he also fails to read Martin Heidegger properly, and
does not understand basic phenomenological concepts
such as lived experience, the reduction, eidos or essence,
phenomenological meaning, and the phenomenological
notion of empathy that he claims to offer as a valid
topic of his approach to phenomenology.
The Meaning of Meaning Attribution 
Meaning attribution is the psychological study of the 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology  
   Volume 17, Edition 1  
    July 2017 
 
      Page 2 of 12 
 
 
© The Author(s). This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0]. 
The IPJP is published in association with NISC (Pty) Ltd and Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
www.ipjp.org 
 
causalities and "motives to make attributions" (Kelley 
& Michela, 1980). Paley's primary critique is that the 
methods he criticizes fail to deliver unambiguously clear 
meanings from texts. But even attribution theorists such 
as Darren Langdridge and Trevor Butt point out, in 
their review of attribution theories, that "the lived 
world is always ambiguous, open to more than one 
interpretation" (2004, p. 357). They discuss the problem 
of "attribution errors", as when meaning attribution is 
explained by internal psychological motives. Ironically, 
Paley commits several attribution errors that betray his 
intolerance for ambiguity, repeatedly criticizing "under-
specified" methods, and constantly trying to convert 
phenomenological analysis of lived human experience 
into concept clarification and a constructivist version of 
meaning attribution. 
 
In this review, I primarily discuss the assertions Paley 
directs towards my (van Manen's) work. Throughout his 
investigative meaning attribution, Paley keeps levelling 
the same complaint: van Manen never makes clear 
"how is meaning distilled from a text." But the point 
is that phenomenology does not "distil meaning from 
texts". Paley keeps asking, over and over again, "How 
does van Manen get from text to meaning?" when he 
misunderstands the basic principles of the methodology 
of phenomenology. Phenomenology is not the study of 
how or why people attribute their meanings to texts. 
As I will show, the focus of phenomenology is on how 
phenomena are given to us in consciousness and pre-
reflective experience. The problem of phenomenology 
is not how to get from text to meaning, but how to get 
from meaning to text.  
 
When critiquing my writings, Paley says that he wants 
to "make a stab at evaluating van Manen's work" (p. 
69); and yet, from more than a hundred articles, book 
chapters, and seven books (van Manen, 1986/2005; 1990/ 
1997; 1991; 1996, 2001; 2014; 2015) and translations of 
phenomenological texts from Dutch and German, he 
selects one early introductory text. Paley criticizes my 
practice of doing phenomenology solely on the basis of a 
few selected quotes from Researching Lived Experience 
[RLE] (1990). RLE was published more than a quarter 
of a century ago, when the term "phenomenology" was 
practically unknown in professional fields such as 
education and nursing in North America. I do not mean 
to disown this text, but since those early days, I have 
published numerous more detailed methodological texts 
that explicate the various features of the wide range of 
phenomenological literature and practices. I am not 
accusing Paley of cherry-picking, because that would 
presume that he has read my other work. However, 
many of my publications are quite frequently cited, and 
my Phenomenology of Practice (2014) was immediately 
a best-seller with my publisher. But, except for RLE, 
Paley simply ignores them all.  
 
So, Paley evaluates "van Manen's work" on the basis of 
Researching Lived Experience. How well does he do 
this? In keeping with the title of my book, Researching 
Lived Experience, phenomenological research is defined 
as the study of lived experience - the world as we 
immediately experience it pre-reflectively rather than 
as we come to conceptualize, categorize, or reflect on it. 
Phenomenology aims at gaining an understanding of 
the phenomenal meaning of experiences, not of texts, as 
Paley wants to believe. In simple terms, phenomenology 
asks, "What is this or that kind of experience like?". It 
differs from almost every other qualitative inquiry in 
that it attempts to gain insightful descriptions of the 
way we experience the world pre-reflectively, without 
taxonomizing, classifying, explaining, conceptualizing, 
abstracting, or even attributing meaning to it. Strangely, 
Paley never discusses these explications of the 
phenomenological method even with respect to this 
single text, from which these lines are taken, or from 
subsequent publications (see, for example, van Manen, 
2014) in which scores of thinkers and authors have been 
discussed that may be of interest to researchers in the 
professional fields of clinical psychology, education, 
medicine, nursing, and so forth. "Phenomenological 
meaning" differs in nature from biographic, narrative, 
ethnographic, conceptual analytic, or psychological 
meaning, and so forth, aimed for by other qualitative 
methodologies. Rather than engage these explications 
seriously, however, Paley rejects them as "under-
specified" and comes up with an abstract, alternate 
definition of "meaning" that he designates "inference 
marker", and which lacks the philosophical foundation, 
qualitative depth and richness of phenomenological 
meaning. 
 
From a Husserlian point of view, phenomenological 
research is the explication of the essential structures of 
phenomena as they present themselves to consciousness. 
Anything that presents itself to consciousness is 
potentially of interest to phenomenology, whether the 
object is real or imagined, empirically measurable, or 
subjectively felt. Husserl pointed out that consciousness 
is the only access human beings have to the world as 
we experience it. Or, rather, it is by virtue of being 
conscious that we are already related to the world. 
Whatever falls outside of consciousness, therefore, falls 
outside the bounds of our possible lived experience. In 
his Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to 
a Phenomenological Philosophy (1913/1983), Husserl is 
at pains to explain that phenomenology does not 
concern itself with facts or with realities in the way that 
psychology (which includes psychological attribution 
theory) does. Husserl says, 
 
Rather phenomenology wants to establish 
itself, not as a science of matters of fact, but as 
a science of essences (as an "eidetic" science); 
it ... exclusively seeks to ascertain "cognitions 
of essences" and no "matters of fact" what-
ever. (1913/1983, p. xx) 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology  
   Volume 17, Edition 1  
    July 2017 
 
      Page 3 of 12 
 
 
© The Author(s). This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0]. 
The IPJP is published in association with NISC (Pty) Ltd and Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
www.ipjp.org 
 
As discussed in RLE, the term "essence" derives from 
the Greek ousia, which means the inner essential nature 
of a thing, the true being of a thing. The Latin essentia 
derives from the verb esse, which means "is" or "to be." 
Essence is therefore that which makes a thing what it 
is (and without which it would not be what it is) in 
itself, rather than its being or becoming something else. 
"Phenomenology", said Merleau-Ponty (1945/1962, 
p. lxxi) "is the study of essences". In other words, 
phenomenology is the systematic attempt to uncover 
and describe the internal meaning structures of lived 
experience that are intuited or grasped through a study 
of the particulars or instances as they are encountered 
in lived experience. RLE contains a lengthy paragraph 
(p. 10) discussing the methodological issues associated 
with "essence", and the concept of essence is also listed 
and explained in the glossary (p. 177). Moreover, in the 
1997 reprint edition of the book, several additional pages 
are specifically devoted to the theme and methodological 
issues associated with the term "essence" (1997, pp. 
xiv-xvi). But, rather than engaging these discussions 
of essence, Paley trumps that they are not there. Paley 
bluntly states that "van Manen (like many other writers) 
never explains what he means by 'essence'" (p. 18). 
Next, he concludes without any evidential support that 
the phenomenological term "essence" means "concept", 
and thus, manifestly and conveniently, he sets himself up 
to treat phenomenological analysis as concept analysis.  
 
Now, if Paley wished to evaluate my work, he could 
have critically addressed some of the features that have 
defined my work over several decades. For example, 
he could have taken issue with my insistence that 
phenomenological research and analysis is essentially a 
writing practice; he could have addressed my develop-
ment of the idea that "anecdotes" and "examples" are 
central methodological devices of phenomenological 
research; he could have taken issue with my coining 
and discussing the role of the "vocative" in pheno-
menological writing; he could have discussed the basic 
premise of a phenomenology of practice; and he could 
have addressed my methodological theme of the genesis 
and discovery of meaning as serendipitous insights (van 
Manen, 2014). He also could have critically examined 
some of the outcomes of my funded research projects, 
such as pedagogical thoughtfulness and tact; writing 
online; the phenomenology of childhood's secrets; the 
tact of teaching. These, I believe, are some of the basic 
contributions that I have made to the theory and practice 
of phenomenology. 
 
But there is none of that. And nowhere in PQR does 
Paley discuss in any depth phenomenological method, 
the application of the epoché and the reduction, which 
are the crucial methods of phenomenology. Indeed, it 
is very difficult to gauge Paley's true interest in, and 
understanding of phenomenology. Paley acknowledges 
that the methodology of phenomenology is embedded 
in philosophy, but then he declares that he does not want 
to be "distracted" by "the convolutions of the pheno-
menological philosophy" (p. 3) and he says that he 
does not want to deal with thinkers such as "Husserl, 
Heidegger, Gadamer, Merleau-Ponty, Ricoeur, and so 
on" (p. 3). But that is like saying that you want to 
bake a cake but not bother with the ingredients and the 
preparation. By focusing on some selected criticisms 
and issues such as Paley's treatment of the meaning 
of "lived experience", I propose to demonstrate that 
most of Paley's critical accusations evaporate into 
smoke for the discerning reader. Even the writings of 
Husserl, Heidegger and Merleau-Ponty are generally 
referred to in a cursory manner or via secondary 
sources. But it is worth noting that, in a footnote, 
Paley briefly does mention the reduction in a single 
sentence: he declares that Husserl, when writing about 
the reduction, "can be almost willfully obscure" (p. 7). 
It is tempting to ask whether Paley's "attribution" of 
willful obscurity to Husserl is really just an excuse 
(attribution error) for choosing to ignore the basic 
methodological significance of the epoché and the 
reduction altogether. 
 
Paley on Heidegger on Lived Experience 
 
Paley actually says very little substantive in his PQR 
about phenomenology as an historical tradition and as 
a method. But he does reference his own recent paper, 
"Heidegger, Lived Experience and Method" (2013). It 
is one of the very few articles that he has written about 
phenomenological method. In it he aims to displace the 
phenomenological notion of "lived experience". Paley 
claims that, "according to Heidegger, there is no such 
thing as 'lived experience'" (p. 1521). Paley elaborates, 
"When I say that, for Heidegger, there is no such 
thing as 'lived experience', I mean that he disowns the 
concept of Erlebnis" (p. 1522). Is Paley's reading of 
Heidegger correct? In numerous texts, in fact, Heidegger 
discusses the relevance and centrality of the term "lived 
experience" in great detail (as I show below). I will show 
Paley that it is much easier to be critical than to be 
correct. 
 
Without providing evidence, Paley furthermore claims 
that Heidegger's real phenomenological approach is 
"observation, naturalistic experiments, some forms of 
discourse analysis and conceptually associated lines of 
enquiry involving vocabularies of motive, scripts and 
performative aspects of language use" (p. 152). But it is 
not clear on what basis he attributes these judgments 
to Heidegger's method. Paley strongly advises nursing 
researchers to forget about the notion of lived experi-
ence. But I believe that Paley's reading of Heidegger is 
short-sighted and that his advice to nurses undermines 
the validity of his PQR, because it is clear that he 
misunderstands the experiential nature of phenomeno-
logical meaning.  
 
Rather than disowning lived experience, Heidegger says, 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology  
   Volume 17, Edition 1  
    July 2017 
 
      Page 4 of 12 
 
 
© The Author(s). This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0]. 
The IPJP is published in association with NISC (Pty) Ltd and Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
www.ipjp.org 
 
The question about the manner of the possible 
having of lived experiences precedes every 
other question containing subject matter. Only 
from there and within the method is the 
fundamental constitution of what is to be 
apprehended determined [and he continues 
that lived experience] can never actually 
objectifyingly be apprehended but only in 
the opposite direction of knowledge, i.e. only 
subjectifyingly. (Heidegger, 1920/2010, p. 88) 
 
In Phenomenology of Intuition and Expression (1920/ 
2010) Heidegger discusses at length "the complex of 
lived experience in its full concretion" (1920/2010, p. 
91). It is not conceptual, objectifying, or theoretic 
meaning that is the aim of phenomenological under-
standing. Rather, phenomenological reflection is a-
theoretic, concerning the living dimensions of our 
existence. When you try to approach lived experience 
theoretically (and for Heidegger reflection is already 
theoretic) you make this living sensibility into an 
object, you objectify. This is where Heidegger departed 
from Husserl. Heidegger attempts to avoid converting 
experience into a thing or an object, and so rather aims 
to understand a phenomenon as a living moment in its 
living meaningfulness. So not objectifying theoretical 
reflection, but reflection that ponders, contemplates, 
muses on, the meaning of things, is the hermeneutic of 
Heidegger's descriptive-interpretive phenomenology. 
It is hard to simplify and explicate this a-theoretic 
reflective method (Besinnung in German), because we 
are so used to making things into objects, or objectifying 
things: for, as soon as we reflect, we turn the named 
object of our reflection into a "thing". 
 
For Paley, and also for others unfamiliar with the rich 
phenomenological literature, it is easy to misunderstand 
the notion of lived experience. Normally we do not think 
about, or phenomenologically reflect on, our experiences 
while we "live" them. And yet, as Heidegger elucidates, 
even though we are not explicitly conscious of our pre-
reflective, a-theoretic everyday experiences, they carry 
the meaningfulness-character of the concrete context of 
life. In his Freiburg Lectures, Heidegger provides some 
telling portrayals of the ordinary and taken-for-granted 
meaningfulness of the nature of lived experience: 
 
In experiencing ... I am engrossed in the 
encounter in each case. Even if it is not 
explicitly conscious, I live in a context of 
anticipation. Unbroken, without having to 
surmount barriers, I slide from one encounter 
into another, and one sinks into the other, and 
indeed in such a way that I do not bother 
about it. I do not at all conceive of the idea 
that there is anything to notice [beachten] 
anyway. I swim along with the stream and 
let the water and the waves crash behind me. 
I do not look back, and living into the next 
one, I do not live in the encounter that has 
just been lived or know about it as having 
just been lived. I am engrossed in the tempo-
rally particular situation and in the unbroken 
succession of situations and to be sure in that 
which encounters me in the situations. I am 
engrossed in it, i.e. I do not view myself or 
bring myself to consciousness: now this 
comes along, now that. But in that which 
comes, I am captured and arrested, fully 
and actively living it. I live the context of 
meaningfulness, which is produced as such in 
and through my experiencing, insofar as I am 
just swimming here and there in this direction 
of expectation.  
 
The more unbroken, the more unconcerned 
about reflection, the more filled out each 
momentary phase of factual life is lived, 
then the more vital the flowing context of 
experience is going to be. The horizons change 
constantly, and in each case I am only open 
for one. (Heidegger, 1919-20/2013, p. 92) 
 
This striking description of lived experience could have 
been written by Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Alfred Schutz 
and many other phenomenologists. Of course, some of 
our experiences may be weighty, shocking, unbearable, 
dramatic, or tragic. Some experiences may ultimately 
lead to or involve us in difficult or serious predica-
ments. Still, from a phenomenological perspective, these 
lived experiences, as we live through them, are primal, 
raw: pre-reflective, pre-predicative, non-reflective, or 
a-theoretic, as Heidegger suggests.  
 
I want to stress that researchers should exercise caution 
in methodologically employing the notion of lived 
experience in various qualitative methodologies. From 
the perspective of phenomenology, it does not help to 
speak solemnly of our "lived experiences" as if they are 
pregnant with meanings that will "emerge" or "spill out" 
as soon as we apply some analytical procedures, as some 
qualitative researchers seem to believe. And yet, it is 
true that the term "lived experience" points to a central 
methodological feature of phenomenology: it announces 
the concern of phenomenology to turn to the epoché and 
the reduction to investigate the primal, eidetic, originary 
or inceptual meanings that are passed over in everyday 
life. That is why it is so telling that Paley ignores and 
dismisses the significance of the various forms of the 
epoché and the reduction as obscure. (For a discussion 
of the various forms of the reduction see van Manen, 
2014, pp. 215-239.) 
 
Husserl pointed out that the phenomenological gesture 
is to lift up and bring into focus, with language, any such 
raw moment of lived experience and orient to the living 
meanings that are embedded in the experience. Any 
and every possible human experience (event, happening, 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology  
   Volume 17, Edition 1  
    July 2017 
 
      Page 5 of 12 
 
 
© The Author(s). This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0]. 
The IPJP is published in association with NISC (Pty) Ltd and Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
www.ipjp.org 
 
incident, occurrence, object, relation, situation, thought, 
feeling, and so on) may become a topic for phenomeno-
logical inquiry. Indeed, what makes phenomenology so 
fascinating is that any ordinary lived through experience 
tends to become quite extraordinary when we lift it up 
from our daily existence and hold it with our pheno-
menological gaze. Wondering about the meaning of a 
certain moment of our lived life may turn into the basic 
phenomenological question: "What is this experience 
like?" 
 
Understanding an experience, as we live through it, is 
obviously very different from understanding the meaning 
of a text or a concept. For example, understanding the 
concept of secrecy is different from understanding its 
experiential meanings. A conceptual approach requires 
that we examine how the concept of secrecy is used in 
everyday language or in selected texts. Indeed, a main 
method of conceptual analysis is premised on the 
assumption that the meaning of a concept lies in its 
usage. But understanding the meaning of the experience 
of secrecy is a very different matter. For example, in 
Childhood's Secrets an attempt is made to explore how 
personal secrets are experienced in early childhood 
(for a free download of this book, see van Manen and 
Levering, 1996). A phenomenology of childhood's 
secrecy is pedagogically significant because, at around 
5 - 7 years of age, children are beginning to live in two 
worlds (an inner world and an outer world) - meaning 
that they can keep things inside, that sharing secrets 
creates intimacy, that they can make themselves invisi-
ble, that they develop a sense of self-identity, that they 
learn to negotiate their privacy in conversations, and 
that they experience a sense of autonomy, and so forth. 
In Childhood's Secrets, some historical, conceptual, and 
etymological sources are used as auxiliary methods for 
phenomenology, but the main focus is always on the 
phenomenal meaning of lived experience: living through 
the experience of keeping and/or sharing secrets. 
  
Heidegger's Method of Using Lived Experience 
Descriptions as Examples 
 
Since Paley believes that Heidegger disowns the notion 
of lived experience, it is necessary to assure him, and 
provide evidence, that Heidegger uses evocative lived 
experience descriptions in, for example, his lengthy 
analysis of the phenomenological meanings of the 
experience of boredom (Heidegger, 1929-30/1995, pp. 
59-180). I do not discuss this study by Heidegger merely 
to show that Paley fails to read Heidegger correctly. I 
want to show why Paley is wrong in using meaning 
attribution to study "how phenomenology is done". In 
the authoritative example offered by Heidegger of a 
phenomenological analysis of experiential meaning, the 
analysis is a non-objectifying, non-theorizing reflective 
writing. People who have read a bit of Heidegger may 
have concluded that his writings are too "philosophical" 
and that it is too difficult to follow many of his famous 
texts. But Heidegger also produced phenomenological 
studies on topics that any of us could have chosen, 
although we might feel challenged to come up with the 
same kinds of insights as Heidegger was able to offer. 
But that should not deter us from learning from 
Heidegger how to pursue a phenomenological question 
- such as the question of the meaning of the experience 
of boredom or being bored. It should be noted that these 
paragraphs are more detailed extensions of my more 
succinct discussion of the meaning of phenomenology 
in its original sense (van Manen, 2017). 
 
Heidegger's exemplary phenomenological analysis of 
boredom is an apt focus for some reflections on pheno-
menological method. The phenomenological question 
is, "What is it like to be bored?". Heidegger appeals to 
our experience of boredom and, on that basis, he aims to 
express in language how our experience of boredom is 
structured. By way of concrete examples, Heidegger 
evokes the lived experience of being bored, ultimately 
distinguishing three forms or kinds of experiential 
meanings of boredom. When Heidegger engages in 
phenomenological explication, he "shows" or lets us 
see how various kinds of boredom appear or show them-
selves in our lives. Heidegger's reflections have nothing 
to do with the psychology of meaning attribution. The 
focus is not on textual meaning but on the meaning of 
the experience of being bored as we live through it. 
 
In presenting the different modalities of boredom, 
Heidegger uses "examples" (imagined or real stories, 
anecdotes, fictional accounts, factual events, etc.) that 
we can readily, but only indirectly, grasp. Indeed, the 
meaning of the experience of boredom is "shown" 
through examples and experiential descriptions that we 
may have experienced ourselves. It is also possible that 
we may never have experienced certain dimensions or 
aspects of boredom. Or, perhaps, we happen to be living 
a very meaningful life, without any boredom. Or, in 
contrast, we never come to recognize how profoundly 
boring our life has been until we reach an age where we 
can no longer change ourselves, such as the character 
in Leo Tolstoy's novella The Death of Ivan Ilyich. On his 
deathbed Ivan Ilyich finally came to the realization of 
how boringly wasted his life had been. It is a ghastly 
realization, causing him to scream, first "Oh! No!" and 
then just a perpetual, hollow "O" (Tolstoy, 1886/1981, 
p. 28). After opening the question about the significance 
of the question of the meaning of boredom, Heidegger 
starts with an anecdote that is a simple but fine example 
of a lived experience description: 
 
We are sitting, for example, in the tasteless 
station of some lonely minor railway. It is 
four hours until the next train arrives. The 
district is uninspiring. We do have a book in 
our backpack, though - shall we read? No. 
Or think through a problem, some question? 
We are unable to. We read the timetables or 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology  
   Volume 17, Edition 1  
    July 2017 
 
      Page 6 of 12 
 
 
© The Author(s). This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0]. 
The IPJP is published in association with NISC (Pty) Ltd and Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
www.ipjp.org 
 
study the table giving the various distances 
from this station to other places we are not 
otherwise acquainted with at all. We look at 
the clock - only a quarter of an hour has gone 
by. Then we go out onto the local road. We 
walk up and down, just to have something 
to do. But it is no use. Then we count the trees 
along the road, look at our watch again - 
exactly five minutes since we last looked at 
it. Fed up with walking back and forth, we sit 
down on a stone, draw all kinds of figures 
in the sand, and in so doing catch ourselves 
looking at our watch yet again - half an hour 
- and so on. (Heidegger, 1929-30/1995, p. 93) 
 
On first impression, this anecdote may appear to be a 
factual personal experiential description by Heidegger. 
But, actually, the tone is fictive. The account describes 
a singular experience, and yet it gives us an experiential 
sense of what the boredom of such a moment is like. 
Still, phenomenology is not psychology: it does not deal 
with your personal experience or with my personal 
experience. Even if the experiential account seems 
factual, it should be approached and analyzed as fictive, 
as merely plausible. It is of no consequence whether 
Heidegger took the lived experience from a novel or an 
interview, whether it is imagined or whether it had really 
happened to Heidegger. Phenomenologists will often, in 
fact, start an experiential story with, "Imagine that..." or 
"Suppose that ...". For example, in his description of 
the objectifying look, Jean-Paul Sartre uses an imagined 
instant of spying on a couple in another room by listen-
ing at the door and looking through a keyhole: "Let us 
imagine that moved by jealousy, curiosity, or vice I have 
just glued my ear to the door and looked through a 
keyhole" (Sartre, 1956, p. 259). Or there is an example 
from Maurice Merleau-Ponty when he says, "Suppose 
that my friend Paul and I are looking at a landscape. 
What precisely happens?" (Merleau-Ponty, 1945/1962, 
pp. 405, 406) (see also van Manen, 2014, pp. 243, 247; 
and Casey, 1981, pp. 176-201). In these examples from 
Heidegger, Merleau-Ponty and Sartre we can see how 
phenomenology starts with experience and subsequently 
aims to express meaningful reflections on experiential 
moments in language that is descriptive and interpretive, 
analytic and evocative (but not theoretic). Of course, 
with many authors the experiential and the reflective 
meanings of texts are intertwined.  
 
Heidegger applies the eidetic reduction to study the 
phenomenological meaning of boredom. He uses the 
above anecdotal description of a lived experience of 
being bored while waiting. This is a phenomenological 
experiential "example". He then carefully explores - that 
is, reflectively interprets - various meaning aspects of 
waiting such as patience and impatient attunement. But 
in questioningly examining several variations (real and 
imagined) of kinds of experiences of boredom, he comes 
to conclude that there is no such thing as either patient 
or impatient boredom. He asks, 
 
What constitutes its boringness? Perhaps it is 
because it is a having to wait, i.e., because we 
are forced, coerced into a particular situation. 
This is why we become impatient. Thus, what 
really oppresses us is more this impatience. 
We want to escape from our impatience. Is 
boredom then this impatience? Is boredom 
therefore not some waiting, but this being 
impatient, not wanting or being able to wait, 
and for this reason being ill-humoured? Yet is 
boredom really an attunement of ill humour or 
even an impatience? Certainly, impatience can 
arise in connection with boredom. Neverthe-
less, it is neither identical with boredom, nor 
even a property of it. There is neither a patient 
nor an impatient boredom. (Heidegger, 1929-
30/1995, p. 94) 
 
After pointing out that our experience of boredom is not 
to be confused with impatience or other such aspects, 
Heidegger elevates the search for meaning by instilling 
(in the reader of his text) a sense of enigma about the 
experience of boredom and our presumptions about its 
meaning and existence. Yes, Heidegger's tone becomes 
increasingly one of wonder. He says, 
 
Strange: in this way we experience many 
kinds of things, yet it is precisely boredom 
itself that we cannot manage to grasp - almost 
as though we were looking for something that 
does not exist at all. It is not all the things we 
thought it was. It vanishes and flutters away 
from us. And yet - this impatient waiting, the 
walking up and down, counting trees, and all 
the other abandoned activities attest precisely 
to the fact that the boredom is there. We 
confirm and reinforce this evidence when we 
say that we are almost dying of boredom. 
(Heidegger, 1929-30/1995, p. 96) 
 
I encourage the reader to read these reflective passages 
of Heidegger's original text on the meaning of boredom. 
Hopefully it makes clear what confuses John Paley when 
he keeps insisting that van Manen persists in being 
"under-specified" or methodologically unclear in attri-
buting meaning to a text. How does van Manen get 
"from the text to the meaning?" "How is meaning dis-
tilled from a text?" (p. 5). Throughout his book, Paley's 
confusion is that he treats phenomenology as if it were 
an exercise in some kind of text or language analysis 
or meaning attribution to texts. It is not! Phenomenology 
is the analysis of lived experience or of the way that 
things show or give themselves in human experience or 
consciousness. Texts are used in the phenomenological 
effort to return to lived-through experience. The central 
effort of all phenomenology is to somehow return to the 
world as we originally experience it - to what is given in 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology  
   Volume 17, Edition 1  
    July 2017 
 
      Page 7 of 12 
 
 
© The Author(s). This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0]. 
The IPJP is published in association with NISC (Pty) Ltd and Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
www.ipjp.org 
 
lived pre-reflective experience, before we have concep-
tualized it, before we have even put words or names to 
it. It is not the mere meaning of words or concepts, but 
the experience itself. As Husserl himself says,  
 
... we can absolutely not rest content with 
"mere words", i.e. with a merely symbolic 
understanding of words, such as we first 
have when we reflect on the sense of the laws 
for "concepts", "judgements," "truths," etc. 
(together with their manifold specifications) 
which are set up in pure logic. Meanings 
inspired only by remote, confused, inauthentic 
intuitions - if by any intuitions at all - are 
not enough: we must go back to the "things 
themselves". (Husserl, 1900/1970, p. 252) 
 
We must go back to the things themselves, to lived 
experience, to what and how we encounter things to be 
in experience. Unlike concept clarification, language 
analysis, or meaning attribution, the meaning of our 
experiences cannot be unequivocally represented by a 
word or a concept. While lived experience is, on first 
glance, shallow (because pre-reflective), it becomes 
increasingly enigmatic as we reflect on it. Heidegger's 
use of lived experience descriptions in another example 
of exploring the meaning of boredom makes this further 
manifest: 
 
We have been invited out somewhere for the 
evening. We do not need to go along. Still, we 
have been tense all day, and we have time in 
the evening. So, we go along. There we find 
the usual food and the usual table conver-
sation, everything is not only very tasty, but 
tasteful as well. Afterward people sit together 
having a lively discussion, as they say, 
perhaps listening to music, having a chat, and 
things are witty and amusing. And already it 
is time to leave. The ladies assure us, not 
merely when leaving, but downstairs and 
outside too as we gather to leave, that it really 
was very nice, or that it was terribly charming. 
Indeed. There is nothing at all to be found that 
might have been boring about this evening, 
neither the conversation, nor the people, nor 
the rooms. Thus, we come home quite satis-
fied. We cast a quick glance at the work we 
interrupted that evening, make a rough assess-
ment of things and look ahead to the next 
day - and then it comes: I was bored after all 
this evening, on the occasion of this invitation. 
(Heidegger, 1929-30/1995, p. 109) 
 
While reflecting on the experiential significance of 
this second experiential anecdote, Heidegger wonders 
what this feeling of boredom consisted in. He wonders, 
"I was bored. But with what? With myself? Did I bore 
myself?". Yet he clearly recalls that not only was there 
nothing boring, but he was not even self-occupied, nor 
pensively reflective, which might have been the pre-
condition for such boredom with self. After reflecting 
further on what the possible meaning of this second kind 
of boredom could have been, Heidegger proceeds to 
contrast the essences, the "essential moments", in these 
two experiences. He comes to an awareness that, in the 
first anecdote (of waiting for the train), there was the 
essential moment of "being held in limbo", while in the 
second account he was "being left empty". Heidegger 
states that in this way he may "discern the path leading 
to originary boredom" (p. 113). By the term "originary" 
Heidegger means the essential or inceptual meaning of 
the experience of boredom. 
 
Now, I suspect, I will see the harried demeanour of John 
Paley: "How can Heidegger possibly come up with these 
meanings?" "Did he just attribute them?" "Why can he 
not be clearer and unequivocally tell us how exactly he 
arrives at the meaning of boredom?" "Why does he have 
to be so under-specified in his methodical determination 
of meaning?" "What then is boredom?" True, Heideg-
ger's phenomenological explications turn increasingly 
subtle, complex, showing the rich ambiguity of lived 
meaning. At one point, Heidegger writes, "We know 
quite clearly that what bores us [in the second case] is 
indeed this 'I know not what', this thing that is indeter-
minate and unfamiliar. The question is: What does it 
mean to say that this thing which is indeterminate and 
unfamiliar bores us?" (p. 119). But, unfortunately, this 
is not the attributive theoretic clarity that Paley would 
have in mind.  
 
Heidegger pursues the phenomenology of boredom by 
inducing us to wonder about its meaning. Wonder 
deepens the question of the meaning of boredom. 
Phenomenological inquiry proceeds through wonder. 
For Heidegger, wonder is a basic "disposition", and this 
disposition of wondering about the meaning of what 
gives itself (as boredom) is the beginning of pheno-
menological inquiry. This wonder leads us to the pure 
acknowledgment of the unusualness of the usual. It is 
not the unusualness, but the usualness of everyday 
common experience that is unusual and that brings us to 
wonder and stirs the desire to understand the meanings 
of our lived through experiences, such as boredom. 
Heidegger's insights into the lived meaning of boredom 
serve to help us reflect on the realization that many of 
our lives are contaminated by profound boredom. Only 
by realizing how all forms of boredom ultimately lead 
to the unsettling sense of profound boredom can we 
hope to turn our lives in more meaningful directions. 
Heidegger's insightful phenomenology of boredom is 
anything but boring - although I realize that Paley may 
become impatient with his style of thinking and writing.  
 
Phenomenological Meaning 
 
For the benefit of Paley, I have quoted a few opening 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology  
   Volume 17, Edition 1  
    July 2017 
 
      Page 8 of 12 
 
 
© The Author(s). This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0]. 
The IPJP is published in association with NISC (Pty) Ltd and Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
www.ipjp.org 
 
paragraphs from Heidegger's hundred page study of 
boredom in order to show that, even though Heidegger 
is known for his fundamental philosophical explications 
of the ontological conditions and possibilities of herme-
neutic phenomenology, his studies of phenomena such 
as boredom, anxiety, technology, and wonder (even 
while pursued in the context of philosophical topics) 
actually are surprisingly recognizable instances of 
contemporary human science methods and the use of 
empirical or experiential examples. Heidegger's studies 
of concrete experiential topics also show that the 
traditional distinctions between philosophical pheno-
menology and human science based phenomenology are 
tenuous and difficult to sustain when it comes to these 
professional or life practice topics. Indeed, this study 
on boredom by Heidegger uncannily resembles the kind 
of research studies that now often are published under 
the flag of empirical phenomenology. I can imagine that 
phenomenological studies of boredom could be highly 
relevant for health care professionals working with bed-
ridden patients. However, it should be realized that, in 
a phenomenological research context, "empirical" means 
experiential, and does not mean experimental, sample-
driven, generalizing, empirical analytic in the sense 
that Paley suggests. 
 
It does not matter whether lived experience descriptions 
are derived from factually or historically observed events, 
whether they are recorded accounts from reliable 
witnesses, or whether these are personal experiences. 
Once the accounts are engaged and mediated in pheno-
menological reflection, they are transfigured and reduced  
- or perhaps we should say "elevated" - to the status of 
"fiction" in the sense that they could have been imagined 
examples (van Manen, 1990, p. 248). Husserl (1913/ 
1983, p. 160) underscored the methodological impor-
tance of fiction for phenomenological inquiry: 
 
Extraordinary profit can be drawn from the 
offerings of history, in an even more abundant 
measure from those of art, and especially from 
poetry which are, to be sure, imaginary but 
which, in the originality of their invention of 
forms [Neugestaltungen], the abundance of 
their single features and the unbrokenness 
of their motivation, tower high above the 
products of our phantasy and, in addition, 
when they are apprehended understandingly, 
become converted into perfectedly clear 
phantasies with particular ease owing to the 
suggestive power exerted by artistic means of 
presentation. Thus, if one is fond of paradoxi-
cal phrases, one can actually say, and if one 
means the ambiguous phrase in the right sense, 
one can say in strict truth, that "feigning" 
[Fiktion] makes up the vital element of 
phenomenology as of every other eidetic 
science, that feigning is the source from which 
the cognition of "eternal truths" is fed.  
In RLE, I explain the methodology of using fictional 
experiential descriptions of human experiences. What 
Husserl confirms here is that essentially the data for 
phenomenological reflection are fictionalized or ficti-
tious. Even so-called empirical (factual) data are treated 
as fiction since they are not used for the purpose of 
empirical generalization or for making factual claims 
about certain phenomena or events (Husserl, 1913/1983, 
p. 248). 
 
So, it appears that Paley completely misunderstands the 
method of phenomenological meaning and the function 
of lived experience descriptions that he criticizes with 
his meaning attribution theory. He criticizes my peda-
gogical examples in RLE of gathering experiential 
descriptions of children's experiences of feeling left or 
abandoned. Lived experience descriptions of children's 
feeling abandoned or left are similar to Heidegger's 
anecdotes about being bored. These descriptions aim to 
capture the subjectivity of a lived experience, but, as I 
explain in RLE, when we try to capture a particular 
experience such as "being left", then one is always too 
late. As soon as we describe what it is we experience, 
the experience is no longer present. There is also the 
additional issue that experiential descriptions inevitably 
objectify the subjectivity of the lived experience. When 
reflecting on a description of any lived experience, the 
question is not what meaning can I attribute to this text, 
but what meaning inheres in the lived experience that 
this description of "being left" expresses. This reflective 
move (the epoché and the reduction) is from text back 
to experience as lived. Actually, I have never engaged 
in a full-fledged phenomenological study of "children 
being left or abandoned" as Paley implies with his 
misunderstood title of his van Manen chapter. I merely 
used some anecdotes in my introductory text RLE as 
teaching examples of writing and editing lived experi-
ence descriptions that might help us to retrieve the lived 
meaning of the experience in a phenomenologically 
written reflective text. But lived experience descriptions 
are not yet phenomenological studies - they are merely 
the initial data for thematic explorations and subsequent 
phenomenological analysis: in other words, reflective 
writing. 
 
When searching for the meaning of lived experience 
descriptions one must constantly ask, "How does this 
text speak to the meaning of the experience as lived 
through?" It is the experience as lived that is the arbiter 
of the meaning of phenomenological reflection on a 
lived experience description, just as in the excerpts from 
Heidegger's reflections on his experiential accounts of 
being bored. Phenomenology aims to evoke the lived 
meaning and asks of readers to recognize this meaning 
in their own lives. This has nothing to do with the 
constructivist intent inherent in Paley's use of meaning 
attribution. Paley's critique of my work consists of 
selecting a few teaching samples of "lived experience 
descriptions" that are provided simply as an introductory 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology  
   Volume 17, Edition 1  
    July 2017 
 
      Page 9 of 12 
 
 
© The Author(s). This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0]. 
The IPJP is published in association with NISC (Pty) Ltd and Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
www.ipjp.org 
 
discussion of phenomenological inquiry. My own stated 
intent was to gain reflective access to the phenomeno-
logy of children feeling left or abandoned, in the same 
way as Heidegger's intent was to gain reflective access 
to the experience of being bored.  
 
Why, in this introductory RLE, did I use the example of 
children's experience of being left or abandoned? The 
reason is that my personal and educational research 
interest is pedagogical. Many government bureaucrats, 
judges, social workers and other childcare workers who 
have removed children from their mothers and fathers 
and subjected them to attending residential schools could 
benefit from a better understanding of what it is like 
for a young child to be taken from his or her family and 
sometimes not being able even to visit them for many 
years. We also know that there are millions of young 
children who have been left or abandoned after their 
parents are lost or killed in wars and armed conflicts. In 
newspapers we read of children who are torn from their 
adoptive parents because of political and ethical issues. 
Britain plucked children as young as four years old from 
their mothers under the so-called empire plan to send 
cheap child labour to the colonies. Some psychiatrists 
say that many of these children have been traumatized in 
ways that may never be healed. How can we understand 
the childhood experience of being taken away, left or 
abandoned? It would have been encouraging if Paley 
could have taken up this phenomenological question. 
 
Paley's Phenomenology of Empathy 
 
In his book, PQR, Paley seems to make an important 
promise about doing a phenomenological study. He 
says, in the remainder of the last chapter, "I present an 
extended example, of my own" based on a published 
PQR study of empathy (p. 159). I was for a brief moment 
delighted: Paley is genuinely interested in the pheno-
menology of empathy! I was genuinely looking forward 
to reading this practical example of Paley, but soon 
realized that it is not Paley who gives an example of 
phenomenological research and taking responsibility 
for its method and insights. He is again playing the role 
of critic. This is disappointing, since I had gone to the 
trouble of searching in vain through some 30 journal 
articles by Paley in the hope of finding an actual single 
phenomenological research study. There is none. Not 
one. Astonishingly, almost all of Paley's published 
"work" consists of critiques of others' attempts to do 
various kinds of qualitative nursing research. I could not 
even find a dissertation that might demonstrate an effort 
on Paley's part to do phenomenology. Often graduate 
students learn to do research in their dissertation project. 
I do not know if Paley ever wrote a dissertation or what 
it might look like. But surely, in British universities, 
an academic without doctoral research experience would 
not be considered qualified to teach nursing students, 
and even less permitted to give research advice to 
graduate students? 
Whatever the case, the last chapter of Paley's PQR is 
proclaimed to deal with the phenomenology of empathy. 
Since Paley seems determined to invest himself in this 
study, I anticipated that, finally, he would turn to the 
phenomenological literature. How can one possibly hope 
to do an explication or a critique of the phenomenology 
of empathy without including the phenomenological 
literature? Surely, Paley should know that empathy 
was an enduring theme in Husserl's writings (see, for 
example, 1913/1989). Edith Stein (1917/1989) wrote 
a now classic study on empathy under the tutelage of 
Husserl (in which, inter alia, she reviews Theodor 
Lipps's inceptual study about Einfühlung, empathy). 
Max Scheler (1913/1970) is well-known for his path- 
breaking phenomenological study on sympathy and 
empathy. Maurice Merleau-Ponty wrote extensively on 
the related theme of intersubjectivity. And, more recently, 
Dan Zahavi wrote brilliantly on the phenomenology of 
empathy in his Self and Other: Exploring Subjectivity, 
Empathy, and Shame (2014, pp. 112-152). But, rather 
than find an engaging contemporary study on some 
aspect of the phenomenology of empathy, I am sorry to 
say that I found only that Paley completely ignores the 
phenomenological question of the lived meaning of the 
phenomenon of empathy: how empathy is experienced. 
 
Instead, in his chapter headed "Meaning, Models and 
Mechanisms", Paley turns his attention to an article by 
Tavakol et al. (2012), "Medical Students' Understanding 
of Empathy: A Phenomenological Study". Paley seems 
energized by the question of how a group of medical 
students share opinions and views on the meaning of 
empathy. And he is interested whether, during their 
studies, empathy declines in these students. However, 
this is entirely an empirical psychological concern. 
These medical students' understanding of the meaning 
of empathy and the possible decline of empathy in 
these students' attitudes is not a question that can be 
addressed by phenomenology. Phenomenology is, firstly, 
not a perception or opinion study, and, secondly, it is not 
a quantitative social science that can make generalizing 
claims regarding the increase or decrease of empathy in 
a particular population of students. If this Chapter 7 of 
Paley's PQR is therefore meant to demonstrate how 
phenomenology should be done, then the selected study 
is a disappointingly faulty example.  
 
Being John Paley 
 
Finally, some comment on the nature of critique and 
criticism that Paley practises is warranted. I have been 
taken aback by the negative tone that Paley employs. To 
be sure, my work has been subject to critique such as by 
Amedeo Giorgi (2006), and while we disagree on certain 
things, I appreciate the scholarship of Giorgi's critique. 
But Paley's critical approach and tone is needlessly 
disrespectful and uninformed. Therefore, I consider it 
appropriate to quote six of Paley's colleagues: Vincent 
Deary, Ian Deary, Hugh McKenna, Tanya McCance, 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology  
   Volume 17, Edition 1  
    July 2017 
 
      Page 10 of 12 
 
 
© The Author(s). This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0]. 
The IPJP is published in association with NISC (Pty) Ltd and Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
www.ipjp.org 
 
Roger Watson, and Amandah Hoogbruin, who comment 
on the rhetorical form of Paley's limited and limiting 
kind of criticism. Deary and colleagues (2002, p. 97) 
describe Paley's critique of research studies of caring in 
nursing as follows:  
 
Paley's (2001) critique of caring research is 
very much a trademark of his (Paley, 1996a, 
1996b, 1997, 1998, 2000). Paley makes no 
contribution to the empirical literature. Rather, 
he aims his criticism at those who dare to 
collect data and, thereby, push forward the 
boundaries of science. Paley's only contribu-
tion to the field of caring is to suggest that 
research into the phenomenon should cease. 
 
It is easy to criticize a research methodology, 
but Paley goes further: he criticizes the people 
who use this methodology, and this is not the 
usual way to mount a critique in science. 
In the closing paragraph of their paper, Deary and his 
colleagues twice use the qualitative adjective "lazy" to 
describe Paley's critical commentary, and state roundly 
that "Paley's tone becomes as abusive as it is incorrect" 
(p. 100). Somewhat surprisingly, Paley confesses that 
his critiques have been described by others "variously as 
naïve, disrespectful, demeaning, paternalistic, arrogant, 
reifying, indicative of a closed mind, akin to positivism, 
a procrustean bed, a perpetuation of fraud, a matter of 
faith, an attempt to secure ideological power, and a 
perspective that puritanically forbids interesting philo-
sophical topics" (Paley, 2010, p. 178). It is indeed a high 
horse Paley has decided to mount in his operatic Don 
Quixote struggle with phenomenological methodology.  
 
For the reader interested in phenomenology, John 
Paley's Phenomenology as Qualitative Research thus 
offers nothing constructive about phenomenological 
methodology - but it does provide a lesson and reminder 
that it is easier to criticize than to do better. 
 
 
 
 
Referencing Format  
 
Van Manen, M. (2017). Phenomenology and meaning attribution [Review essay on the book Phenomenology as 
qualitative research: A critical analysis of meaning attribution, by John Paley]. Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology, 
17(1), 12 pp. doi: 10.1080/20797222.2017.1368253 
 
 
 
 
About the Author 
 
 
 
Max van Manen 
Professor Emeritus 
University of Alberta, Canada 
E-mail address: max.van.manen@ualberta.ca 
 
 
Max van Manen PhD, EdD (Hon) is a Professor Emeritus (2011) at the University of 
Alberta in Canada. 
 
His academic interests include human science research methods, pedagogical theory and practice, pedagogical tact, 
pathic dimensions of knowing, and the experience of intimacy, interiority and privacy through online writing. 
 
Professor van Manen's books include Researching Lived Experience, The Tact of Teaching, Childhood's Secrets 
(with Bas Levering), The Tone of Teaching, Writing in the Dark (edited), Phenomenology of Practice, and 
Pedagogical Tact. 
 
His publications have been translated into a dozen languages.  
 
http//www.maxvanmanen.com/ 
 
 
 
 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology  
   Volume 17, Edition 1  
    July 2017 
 
      Page 11 of 12 
 
 
© The Author(s). This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0]. 
The IPJP is published in association with NISC (Pty) Ltd and Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
www.ipjp.org 
 
References 
 
 
Deary, V., Deary, I. J., McKenna, H. P., McCance, T. V., Watson, R., & Hoogbruin, A. L. (2002). Elisions in the 
field of caring. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 39(1), 96-102. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2648.2002.02246.x 
 
Giorgi, A. (2006). Concerning variations in the application of the phenomenological method. The Humanistic 
Psychologist, 34(4), 305-319. doi: 10.1207/s15473333thp3404_2 
 
Giorgi, A. (2017). A response to the attempted critique of the scientific phenomenological method [Review Essay]. 
Journal of Phenomenology and Psychology, 48(1), 83-144. doi: 10.1163/15691624-12341319 
 
Heidegger, M. (1962). Being and time (J. Macquarrie & E. Robinson, Trans.). New York, NY: Harper & Row. (Original 
work published 1927) 
 
Heidegger, M. (1995). Fundamental concepts of metaphysics: World, finitude, solitude (W. McNeill & N. Walker, Trans.).  
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press. (Original lecture course presented 1929-1930) 
 
Heidegger, M. (2010). Phenomenology of intuition and expression: Theory of philosophical concept formation (T. Colony, 
Trans.). London, UK: Continuum. (Original lecture course presented 1920) 
 
Heidegger, M. (2013). Basic problems of phenomenology (S. M. Campbell, Trans.) London. UK: Continuum. (Original 
lecture course presented 1919-1920)) 
 
Heider, F. (1958). The psychology of interpersonal relations. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
 
Husserl, E. (1970). Logical investigations, Volume I (J. N. Findlay, Trans.). London, UK: Humanities Press International. 
(Original work published 1900) 
 
Husserl, E. (1983). Ideas pertaining to a pure phenomenology and to a phenomenological philosophy. First book: 
General introduction to a pure phenomenology (F. Kersten, Trans.). Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer. (Original 
work published 1913) 
 
Husserl, E. (1989). Ideas pertaining to a pure phenomenology and to a phenomenological philosophy. Second book: 
General introduction to a pure phenomenology (R. Rojcewicz & A. Schuwer, Trans.). Dordrecht, Netherlands: 
Kluwer. (Original work drafted 1912, completed 1928, and published posthumously 1952) 
 
Kelley, H. H., & Michela, J. L. (1980). Attribution theory. Annual Review of Psychology, 31, 457-501. 
 
Langdridge, D., & Butt, T. (2004). The fundamental attribution error: A phenomenological critique. British Journal of 
Social Psychology, 43(3), 357-369. doi: 10.1348/0144666042037962 
 
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1962). Phenomenology of perception (C. Smith, Trans.). London, UK: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
(Original work published 1945) 
 
Paley, J. (2010). Spirituality and reductionism: Three replies. Nursing Philosophy, 11(3), 178-190. doi: 10.1111/j.1466- 
769X.2010.00439.x 
 
Paley, J. (2014). Heidegger, lived experience and method. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 70(7), 1520-1531. doi: 10.1111/ 
jan.12324  
 
Paley, J. (2017). Phenomenology as qualitative research: A critical analysis of meaning attribution. London, UK & 
New York, NY: Routledge. 
 
Scheler, M. (1970). The nature of sympathy (P. Heath, Trans.). Hamden, CT: Archon Books. (Original work published 
1913) 
 
Stein, E. (1989). On the problem of empathy (W. Stein, Trans.). Washington, DC: ICS Publications. (Original work 
published 1917) 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology  
   Volume 17, Edition 1  
    July 2017 
 
      Page 12 of 12 
 
 
© The Author(s). This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0]. 
The IPJP is published in association with NISC (Pty) Ltd and Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
www.ipjp.org 
 
Tavakol, S., Dennick, R., & Tavakol, M. (2012). Medical students' understanding of empathy: A phenomenological 
study. Medical Education, 46(3), 306-316. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2923.2011.04152.x 
 
Tolstoy, L. (1981). The death of Ivan Ilyich. New York, NY: Random House. (Original work published 1886) 
 
Van Manen, M. (1991). The tact of teaching: The meaning of pedagogical thoughtfulness. London, ON: Routledge. 
 
Van Manen, M. (1997). Researching lived experience: Human science for an action sensitive pedagogy. London, ON: 
Routledge. (Original work published 1990) 
 
Van Manen, M. (Ed.). (2001). Writing in the dark: Phenomenological studies in interpretive inquiry. London, ON: 
Routledge. 
 
Van Manen, M. (2005). The tone of teaching: The language of pedagogy. London, ON: Routledge. (Original work 
published 1986) 
 
Van Manen, M. (2014). Phenomenology of practice: Meaning-giving methods in phenomenological research and writing. 
London, ON: Routledge. 
 
Van Manen, M. (2015). Pedagogical tact: Knowing what to do when you don't know what to do. London, ON: Routledge. 
 
Van Manen, M. (2017). Phenomenology in its original sense. Qualitative Health Research, 27(6), 810-825. doi: 10.1177/ 
1049732317699381 
 
Van Manen, M., & Levering, B. (1996). Childhood's secrets: Intimacy, privacy, and the self reconsidered. New York, 
NY: Teachers College Press. Free download at: http://hdl.handle.net/10402/era.28662 
 
Zahavi, D. (2014). Self and other: Exploring subjectivity, empathy, and shame. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
 
 
_____________________ 
 

