International Journal of Philosophical Studies
ISSN: 0967-2559 (Print) 1466-4542 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/riph20
Phenomenology and De Re Interpretation: A
Critique of Brandom's Reading of Hegel
Stephen Houlgate
To cite this article: Stephen Houlgate (2009) Phenomenology and De Re Interpretation: A
Critique of Brandom's Reading of Hegel, International Journal of Philosophical Studies, 17:1,
29-47, DOI: 10.1080/09672550802610958
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/09672550802610958
Published online: 14 Feb 2009.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 466
View related articles 
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=riph20

International Journal of Philosophical Studies Vol. 17(1), 29-47
International Journal of Philosophical Studies
ISSN 0967-2559 print 1466-4542 online © 2009 Taylor & Francis
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/09672550802610958
Phenomenology and De Re 
Interpretation: A Critique of 
Brandom's Reading of Hegel
Stephen Houlgate
Taylor and Francis
RIPH_A_361263.sgm
10.1080/09672550802610958
International Journal of Philosophical Studies
0967-2559 (print)/1466-4542 (online)
Original Article
2008
Taylor & Francis
17
10000002008
StephenHoulgate
Stephen.Houlgate@warwick.ac.uk
Abstract
Brandom's interpretation of Hegel in Tales of the Mighty Dead is subtle,
tightly argued and hugely impressive. It takes no account, however, of Hegel's
distinctive conception of phenomenology and as a result - for all its subtlety -
offers a somewhat distorted picture of Hegel. In the opening chapters of
Hegel's Phenomenology we learn that perception is committed as much to the
unity of differences as to exclusive difference, that neither perception nor
understanding is committed to holism as Brandom understands it, and that the
understanding is not governed by the law of non-contradiction but in fact
understands the world to be a thoroughly contradictory place. All of this,
however, gets lost sight of in Brandom's de re interpretation of Hegel's
Phenomenology.
Keywords: Brandom; Hegel; de re interpretation; phenomenology
De Dicto and De Re Interpretation
At first sight Robert Brandom's two essays on Hegel in his book Tales of the
Mighty Dead appear barely to be about Hegel at all.1 The first essay on
holism and idealism, for example, talks of 'sense dependence' and 'reference
dependence', and even invokes a point in logic made by Gilbert Harman
(TMD 191-2, 194). Scarcely normal fare for the average commentator on
Hegel. Brandom himself is acutely conscious of the impression his work on
Hegel (and on the other philosophers discussed in Tales of the Mighty Dead)
might have on his readers. 'I am aware', he writes, 'that the relations between
the stories told here and my own philosophical views [ ... ] may seem to some
particularly problematic' (TMD 90). In the section of his book called
'Pretexts', however, Brandom provides a subtle defence of his approach and
makes it clear that he is by no means simply 'foisting' his ideas on the helpless
dead (TMD 91; see also 389). He does so by distinguishing between two
different modes of interpretation: de dicto and de re.

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
30
Brandom states that interpretation of a philosophical text seeks to estab-
lish the claims made in it and to determine what follows from them. This
task, however, presupposes a 'context' of interpretation (TMD 95).
When a text is given a de dicto interpretation, the context is supplied by
the author's own commitments. The aim is thus to determine what the
author himself would have said in response to questions of clarification,
given those commitments (TMD 99).
The aim of a de re interpretation of a text is different. It is to determine
not what the author himself would have said about this or that, but what
really follows from the claims he makes, what follows from them in truth
(TMD 100).2 In this case, the context of interpretation is supplied by other
claims that the interpreter (rather than the author) holds to be true. When it
is argued that a commitment follows in fact from a philosopher's claims, the
interpreter has to make reference to the facts 'as she takes them to be; that
is the best any of us can do' (TMD 101).
In Brandom's view, neither the de re nor the de dicto approach is intrinsi-
cally better than the other: 'all contexts define in principle equally valid
perspectives from which to specify the conceptual content of a claim'. One's
choice of interpretive approach depends, therefore, on pragmatic consider-
ations, namely, on 'the purposes, interests, and plans of the interpreter'
(TMD 106).
In his essays on Hegel Brandom aims to establish what really follows from
Hegel's claims, rather than what Hegel thought should follow. The first
essay in particular offers what is 'basically a de re reading'. As Brandom
openly admits, therefore, the argument in that essay 'crucially depends on
claims that I undertake' (TMD 103).
In view of this it makes little sense for readers of Brandom's work to
complain that Hegel himself would not have thought in terms of reference
dependence or sense dependence. To challenge Brandom's reading of
Hegel properly one would need to challenge Brandom's own commitments,
or at least show that he misunderstands what follows, given his own commit-
ments, from Hegel's claims. Such an endeavour is, however, beyond the
scope of this article. My aim here is more modest: it is simply to suggest that
if one adopts the approach to Hegel taken by Brandom, something distinc-
tively Hegelian - and intrinsically important - gets lost. Furthermore, I am
not sure that Brandom realizes it gets lost, because I am not sure that it
forms part of his picture of Hegel in the first place.
The principal thing that gets lost, in my view, is the very idea of phenom-
enology, as Hegel understands it. This is because it is hard to see how
Hegel's idea of phenomenology can be accommodated within Brandom's
twofold distinction between de dicto and de re interpretation.3
On the one hand, Hegelian phenomenology does not seek to determine
merely what consciousness 
 
itself
 
 would have said in response to questions of
clarification; it aims to determine what follows 
 
in truth
 
 from the claims of

PHENOMENOLOGY AND DE RE INTERPRETATION
31
consciousness. Indeed, each new shape of consciousness arises precisely by
taking up and affirming the truth that emerges in the previous shape. (In this
sense the transition from sense certainty to perception or Wahr-nehmung is
paradigmatic for the whole phenomenology.) From this point of view,
therefore, phenomenology looks like an exercise in 
 
de re
 
 interpretation.
On the other hand, phenomenology does not seek to assess the claims of
consciousness in the context of 'facts' that the phenomenologist endorses.
Indeed, the whole point of phenomenology is to avoid bringing any exter-
nal criteria to bear on consciousness at all. As Hegel famously argues, what-
ever criterion is employed in phenomenology to assess the claims of
consciousness must be found within (and be endorsed by) consciousness
itself.4
What phenomenology seeks to determine, therefore, is what really
follows from the claims of consciousness alone, without reference to any
other commitments that the phenomenologist may have. Furthermore,
phenomenology aims to determine what really follows from the claims of
consciousness alone within the experience of consciousness itself. What
really follows from these claims is not what consciousness itself expects to
follow. Nonetheless, it is a truth that emerges - despite consciousness's best
endeavours - for consciousness and within its own experience.5
In this respect phenomenology does not look like a mode of de re inter-
pretation in precisely Brandom's sense. It is at most a special case thereof in
which the only commitment of his own the phenomenologist may bring to
bear on the study of consciousness is the commitment to set aside any deter-
minate commitments of his own and to work out what experience is made
necessary by the commitments of consciousness alone. Such a form of
understanding, which does not overlap exactly with either de re or de dicto
interpretation, might be called understanding de experientia.
It appears, then, that Brandom's distinction between de re and de dicto
interpretation - a distinction on which he relies in order to justify his own
approach to Hegel - fails to allow for the possibility of phenomenology in
Hegel's sense. This is because it fails to allow for an approach to conscious-
ness that aims to determine what follows necessarily from the claims of
consciousness alone and within the experience of consciousness itself.
At one point in Tales of the Mighty Dead Brandom acknowledges that
there is a distinctive mode of interpretation that can be called '"phenome-
nological" in a hegelian sense' (TMD 110). This, we are told, involves 'both
a retrospective interpretation of a text de traditione and an immediate de re
reading'. The interpreter thus assesses claims in a text both in light of his own
commitments and in light of the 'most developed position in the tradition'
to which the text in question belongs (TMD 110). This confirms, however,
that Brandom does not understand Hegelian phenomenology as a rigorously
immanent study of consciousness in which all commitments are set aside,
except for those endorsed by consciousness itself. On my reading, therefore,

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
32
Brandom does not understand phenomenology in a distinctively Hegelian
sense.
Brandom's own, overtly de re interpretation of Hegel is clearly incompat-
ible with Hegel's phenomenological approach as I understand it. It is also
incompatible with Hegel's expectations for us as readers. Hegel's use of the
word 'we' in the Phenomenology suggests that we readers are not simply to
study Hegel's attempt to understand consciousness, but are to participate
with him in that very attempt. That is, we are to do phenomenology
ourselves, not just to assess the merits of the text in which Hegel does it. That
in turn means that the proper object of our study is actually consciousness
itself, rather than a book. Furthermore, we are meant to approach
consciousness in the same way Hegel does: by setting aside our own commit-
ments and thinking through the consequences for consciousness of taking
its objects to be a certain way. By contrast, Brandom's approach entails
assessing Hegel's arguments in light of claims that he (Brandom) holds true
independently.6
It is Brandom's avowed purpose in Tales of the Mighty Dead to provide a
de re interpretation of Hegel, so from that point of view we have no real
grounds for complaint. It is important, however, to have a clear idea of the
alternatives to Brandom's de re approach. These do not just include de dicto
interpretation and the fusion of approaches that Brandom names 'phenom-
enological'. There is also the alternative - apparently neglected by Brandom
- of engaging in phenomenology as Hegel conceives it. This is an alternative
for us as much as it is for Hegel.
Brandom's Hegel
On my reading, Hegel's phenomenology does not present Hegel's own
understanding of the world. It sets out his understanding of the conse-
quences for consciousness of taking the world to be a certain way. Hegel
presents his own view of the world in the Logic and the Realphilosophie, but
not - at least not directly - in the Phenomenology.7
Brandom, by contrast, takes Hegel to be making direct claims of his own
in the Phenomenology. The principal claims he ascribes to Hegel in his first
essay on him in Tales of the Mighty Dead, 'Holism and Idealism in Hegel's
Phenomenology', are these. First, 'the way things are or could be taken to
be must be determinate' (TMD 178). Second, determinateness involves not
just 'mere difference', but also 'modally robust exclusion' (TMD 179). The
properties 'square' and 'red' are different, but also compatible. Fully coher-
ent determinateness, however, requires '"exclusive" difference'; that is, it
requires properties to be 'materially incompatible' with certain other prop-
erties (in the way that being 'square' is incompatible with being 'triangular').
Hegel's claim, as Brandom presents it, is that only a world in which proper-
ties exclude - are materially incompatible with - certain other properties can

PHENOMENOLOGY AND DE RE INTERPRETATION
33
be a coherent world. This exclusiveness is 'codified', as Brandom puts it, in
the principle of non-contradiction: 'p rules out not-p; they are incompatible'
(TMD 179). Far from rejecting the law of non-contradiction, therefore,
Brandom's Hegel 'radicalizes it, and places it at the very center of his
thought'.
Brandom goes on to understand the concepts 'object' and 'subject' in
terms of material incompatibility (TMD 182). Objects are things that cannot
at the same time exhibit two incompatible properties. Subjects, on the other
hand, are things that ought not to attribute incompatible properties to the
same object. This is the distinction between objective and subjective incom-
patibility, to which we shall return in a minute.
Brandom's Hegel is said to prove that content must be determinate in the
strong sense of exclusion in the chapter on 'sense certainty' (TMD 179, 183).
In the following chapters he then works out the consequences of this claim.
The first consequence is that such an understanding commits one to seman-
tic holism. This is the view that states of affairs and properties are rendered
determinate by the broad set of relations of exclusion in which they stand.
Brandom argues that Hegel is committed to such holism, whether he likes it
or not, but that he also explicitly endorses it himself. (In this sense, his read-
ing of Hegel is in part a de dicto interpretation.)
Brandom distinguishes two kinds of holism. First, there is weak individ-
uational holism - the claim that 'articulation by relations of material
incompatibility is necessary' (though not sufficient) 'for determinate
contentfulness' (TMD 183). Evidence that Hegel himself endorses weak
holism is said to be found in the chapter on perception, specifically in the
claim (here in Brandom's wording) that 'one property can be understood
as determinate only by understanding many other properties [ ... ] as simi-
larly determinate' (TMD 183).
Second, there is strong individuational holism - the claim that 'articulation
by relations of material incompatibility is sufficient [ ... ] for determinate
contentfulness'. Such strong holism is incoherent, in Brandom's view,
because relata are utterly dissolved into the relations between them so that
nothing is left between which there can be relations (TMD 187). Brandom's
Hegel is committed only to weak holism, not to its strong, incoherent coun-
terpart (TMD 188, 201). Nonetheless (as we shall see), Brandom believes
that understanding properties solely in terms of their incompatibility with
other properties is one important part of the process of understanding deter-
minacy properly. Strong holism is thus not completely misconceived, but
corresponds to 'one (ultimately inadequate) phase in the process of grasping
or understanding a holistic relational structure' (TMD 201; see also 205).
Evidence that Hegel incorporates into his weak holism the idea that prop-
erties are wholly defined by relations of exclusion is found by Brandom in
the concept of 'infinity' in the chapter on 'force and understanding'. Such
infinity, Brandom writes, is 'a structure of differences (exclusions)' in which

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
34
'the identity or unity of the differentiated items is understood as consisting
in those relations of reciprocal exclusion' (TMD 189, my italics).
The second consequence of holding that determinateness involves exclu-
sion - after the necessary commitment to holism - is that one is committed
to what Brandom calls 'objective idealism' (TMD 196). Brandom explains
what such idealism involves as follows. First (following Gilbert Harman),
one must distinguish relations between concepts themselves from processes
of reasoning in which we engage. Second, one must understand the above-
mentioned distinction between objective and subjective incompatibility in
terms of this distinction between relations and processes. Objective incom-
patibility is a simple relation between concepts or properties: the fact that
two properties exclude one another and so cannot both belong to the same
object at the same time. Subjective incompatibility is a relation between
commitments held by a subject: the fact that two commitments ought not
both to be held by the same subject. This relation between commitments
makes it necessary for the subject holding them to engage in a certain
process of reasoning. Specifically, the subject must try to resolve incompat-
ible commitments by revising them or relinquishing one of them (TMD 193).
'Objective idealism' is the thesis that one cannot understand what it is for
properties to be objectively incompatible unless one understands what it is
for our commitments to be subjectively incompatible. That is to say, one
cannot understand the objective relations that render the world determi-
nate, unless one understands the subjective process of acknowledging and
resolving our own incompatible commitments (TMD 193).8
Indeed, Brandom goes further and maintains that the grasp of objective
relations does not merely require, but actually 'consists in engaging in the
corresponding processes': understanding properties to be objectively
incompatible just is acknowledging a subjective obligation to resolve our
own incompatible commitments (TMD 194).
This, Brandom tells us, is the thesis of 'conceptual pragmatism', according
to which 'grasp of a concept [ ... ] is a practical capacity, [ ... ] the capacity
to do something' (TMD 194). As far as I can tell, Brandom never explains
in his essay precisely why the capacity to understand relations of incompat-
ibility or exclusion involves, or consists in, the 'capacity to do something'.
He thus never explains precisely why Hegel should be committed to objec-
tive idealism and conceptual pragmatism. But he makes it very clear that
Hegel is so committed, and he maintains that Hegel's idealism (in the sense
just specified) emerges explicitly 'from the expository transition from
"Consciousness" to "Self-consciousness"' (TMD 193).
Brandom goes on to explain that Hegel's idealism asserts a relation of
'sense dependence', not 'reference dependence', between objective rela-
tions of exclusion and subjective processes of understanding. A concept is
sense dependent on another when one cannot understand the first without
the second. The concept 'nail', for example, is sense dependent on that of

PHENOMENOLOGY AND DE RE INTERPRETATION
35
'hammer', because we cannot understand what a nail is unless we under-
stand what a hammer is (TMD 195). A concept is reference dependent on
another when the first cannot actually apply to anything in the world unless
the other one does as well. To claim that the concept 'nail' is reference
dependent on that of 'hammer' is thus to claim (wrongly) that nails cannot
exist unless hammers exist.
Objective relations of exclusion are sense dependent on subjective
processes of understanding, therefore, because one cannot understand
the former without the latter. This is not to say, however, that such objective
relations depend for their existence on processes of rational thought.
Hegel's idealism, Brandom insists, does not claim that the world is mind
dependent. It claims only that our understanding of that world involves an
understanding of the processes and practices of reasoning (TMD 198).
In the last section of his essay, Brandom discusses one final condition of
understanding the world to be determinate. This is the process called
'traversing the moments', that is, Hegel's own 'distinctively structured
dialectical process of understanding' (TMD 202, 209). 'Determinateness
requires a kind of holism, and that holism is intelligible only on the hypoth-
esis of objective idealism' (TMD 201); but holism also requires us to think
dialectically.
The example Brandom gives to illustrate such dialectical understanding
is that of understanding properties. The first stage in such understanding,
Brandom writes, involves grasping a property 'as immediately contentful'.
The property is taken to be 'just the thing it is, brutely there' (TMD 204).
What is grasped at this initial stage is not merely the bare form of a property:
we do not note simply that there is some property there. Rather, we grasp
an immediate sensuous content: we judge that something is red, blue or
green.
The second stage involves grasping the relations to other properties
which render a property determinately, rather than just immediately,
contentful. These relations, as we have seen, must be relations of exclusion.
One sees, therefore, 'that the property is determinate only insofar as it
strongly differs from other properties', that is, excludes them as incompati-
ble with it (TMD 204).
If one were to focus solely on this second stage and take it to contain the
whole truth about properties, one would be committed to strong holism. As
we know, however, such strong holism is regarded by Brandom as incoher-
ent, because it dissolves things completely into their relations and so leaves
nothing between which relations can hold. Strong holism thus renders
impossible the very determinacy that relations of exclusion are meant to
explain. Fortunately, this second stage does not tell the whole story. For,
although a property is rendered fully determinate by its exclusion of other
properties, the property is not reducible to such relations of exclusion. It is
also what it is in its immediacy. This immediacy is precisely what provides

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
36
the relatum without which relations cannot be understood. Relations of
exclusion are thus necessary, but not sufficient, for determinacy, and we are
committed to weak, not strong, holism (though strong holism captures one
important aspect of that weak holism).
The third stage involves putting the first two stages together. That is to say,
we understand the immediate identity of the property to consist in its rela-
tions of exclusion and difference (TMD 205). This does not mean that 'red'
is simply eliminated in favour of 'not-green', 'not-blue', and so on. It means
that 'red' itself in its very immediacy is 'not-green', 'not-blue', and so on. As
Brandom puts it, what we have at this stage is 'immediacy as mediated', 'fully
mediated immediacy' (TMD 206). What is accessible to observation is just
the immediate property; what we understand conceptually are the relations
of exclusion which constitute that property. The observable immediacy thus
serves, as Brandom puts it, as a sign which expresses 'the underlying, only
theoretically [ ... ] accessible reality' of the relations (TMD 206). In so doing,
however, the immediacy of the property does not point beyond itself to
something else, but points merely to 'something implicit [ ... ] in it, in the
content it has' (TMD 206). The process of traversing the moments that
Brandom describes thus renders explicit the relationality - or 'inferential
articulation' (TMD 181) - that is implicit in the immediacy with which we
begin.9
Note that this process does not simply happen but involves our being
active and doing something (see TMD 207, 384). We begin by taking things
in their immediacy; we then move on to grasp them as what they are medi-
ately or for others; and lastly we understand them 'as mediated immediacy'
(TMD 209). We thus build up an understanding of properties and their rela-
tions by altering our commitments and thereby resolving commitments that
are otherwise incompatible (TMD 206-7). Indeed, our understanding of
those properties consists precisely in knowing what we have to do to make
them intelligible. In this sense, traversing the moments exemplifies Hegel's
idealism, as Brandom understands it: for it shows that 'the determinateness
of the objective world and the structured process of grasping it are recipro-
cally sense dependent concepts, each intelligible only in terms of the other'
(TMD 208).
Hegel on Perception and Understanding
Brandom's interpretation of Hegel in 'Holism and Idealism in Hegel's
Phenomenology' is subtle, tightly argued and hugely impressive. In my view,
however, it takes no account of Hegel's distinctive conception of phenome-
nology, and as a result - for all its subtlety - offers a somewhat distorted
picture of Hegel.
I have already noted that, on my reading in contrast to Brandom's, Hegel
in his Phenomenology does not make direct claims of his own about the

PHENOMENOLOGY AND DE RE INTERPRETATION
37
world, but shows what emerges in the experience of consciousness - for
consciousness - when it takes the world to be a certain way. Hegel's
phenomenology thereby at most reveals indirectly aspects of his under-
standing of things.
In my view, Brandom also simplifies what emerges from the experience
of sense certainty. He maintains that what is proven in the chapter on sense
certainty is (a) that content must be determinate and (b) that full determi-
nateness requires exclusiveness and 'material incompatibility' (TMD 179,
182-3). By contrast, what actually emerges in the experience of sense
certainty (as Hegel articulates it) is that the object of consciousness must be
- for consciousness - a unity of differences. Not only, therefore, must
content be determinate; it must also be unified and self-identical, or what
Hegel calls 'reflected into itself' (PG 89 / 64). This is made necessary by the
experience of pointing (Aufzeigen) at the end of the chapter on sense
certainty.
Hegel describes the experience of pointing as follows: I point out, and
bring to mind, what is before me now - 'this now. Now' (PG 88 / 63). In
being pointed out, however, this now ceases to be, and so becomes some-
thing past. What I bring to mind is thus in fact a now that is no longer, a now
that has been: 'ein gewesenes'. Yet the movement that Hegel is examining is
not one that simply fails to do what it sets out to do; it is one in which what
is there now is, indeed, pointed out. The now, therefore, is brought to mind:
it comes before me now. It is brought to mind, however, not just as a pure
now, but as a now that also has a past, a now that has been. In the experience
of pointing, therefore, the now emerges as a unity of different moments. On
the one hand, it is a simple unity - the now; on the other hand, it is the unity
of the present and the past, the now and the no-longer-now. Such a unity
that includes within it its own negation Hegel calls a 'universal'. This is not
the abstract, indeterminate universal that arises in the first two forms of
sense certainty. It is a new, concrete universal: 'a simple that, in its other-
ness, remains what it is'. This is the 'now which is an absolute plurality of
nows' or the here that is 'a simple complex of many heres' (PG 89-90 / 64).
It is this idea that the object of consciousness must be a unity of differ-
ences - not just the idea that content must be determinate - that is taken up
by perception as the truth. Indeed, the very idea of a 'property' is nothing
but a sensuous immediacy understood as such a unity of differences or as a
universal (PG 94 / 68). Properties are not only universals or unities, but are
also differentiated from one another; and, as Brandom notes, this means that
'many such properties are posited simultaneously, one being the negative of
another' (TMD 183; see also PG 94 / 68). Yet each property in its difference
from others remains a universal or unity that is related only to itself. Conse-
quently, Hegel states, 'each is on its own and free from the others'; in other
words, they are 'indifferent to one another' (PG 94 / 68). In this respect they
do not exclude one another but can co-exist in one here and now; they are

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
38
different but compatible properties that can belong to the same thing. The
salt, therefore, is 'white and also tart, also cubical in shape' (PG 95 / 68).
According to Brandom, Hegel argues in 'sense certainty' that the idea of
a world exhibiting mere 'indifferent' difference, without exclusive differ-
ence, is incoherent (TMD 179). Brandom fails to point out, however, that
the experience of sense certainty commits perception just as much to the
'indifferent' difference of properties - that is, to their compatibility with one
another - as to their incompatibility. This is because properties are defined
not least by their relation to themselves.
This self-relation, by the way, preserves the immediacy and independence
of properties and so prevents them from being dissolved into nothing but
relations. Brandom, as we have seen, also recognizes that properties have an
immediacy of their own. He thinks of this immediacy, however, as that from
which we start and from which we move on to consider the relations of
exclusion in which the property stands. He does not think of the distinctive
immediacy of a universal property as emerging in the same experience in
which properties prove to be fully determinate. This, I think, is because he
does not recognize - at least not explicitly - that what results from the expe-
rience of sense certainty is not just difference and determinacy, but also the
unity of differences (and unity in difference).
Yet why should it matter that the objects of perception - things and their
properties - are characterized as much by unity and 'being-for-self' as by
exclusive difference? Because what will concern perception throughout
Hegel's discussion of it is precisely the relation between these two moments,
not the specific question (and problem) of holism. The question which
Brandom's Hegel has to answer is whether the holism to which his concep-
tion of determinacy commits him is weak or strong. This, however, is not a
problem that arises for perception as Hegel understands it.
Perception relates to the thing with properties and tries to perceive it as
it is (PG 96 / 70). It is also aware, however, that it is capable of deception
and error. The criterion it employs to distinguish truth from error is that of
'self-equality' or 'self-identity' (Sichselbstgleichheit) (PG 97 / 70). The
object is perceived properly, therefore, when it is perceived to be what it is
and to lack internal contradiction: the object of perception cannot both be
and not be what it is. The initial experience of perception requires it,
however, continually to correct its perception in order to take account of the
different aspects of its object but also to preserve the latter's self-identity. In
this experience the object is perceived to be, first, one thing, then an aggre-
gate of universal properties that continue in other things, then a distinct
thing with properties opposed to those of other things, then a mere medium
in which independent properties subsist, and, finally, nothing but those
properties themselves (PG 97-8 / 70-1). What comes to the fore in this
experience is not only now the thing and now its properties, but also now
unity and now difference (and indeed different kinds of difference).

PHENOMENOLOGY AND DE RE INTERPRETATION
39
This experience is then repeated, but this time the different aspects of the
object are attributed now to the thing itself and now to the perceiving
subject (PG 101 / 73-4). In this way, perception once again has to correct
itself in order to take account of the different features of the thing while
preserving the latter's self-identity (PG 99-100 / 72-3).
Any contradiction in the way the thing appears to perception is initially
put down to perception itself and is seen as a mark of error on its part
(PG 99 / 72). At the same time, however, the thing itself is understood to
show one face to perception and to be another thing for itself. In this way,
the thing is understood to be divided within itself (PG 101 / 74). It is also
perceived to be divided into what it is for itself and what it is in relation to
other things. This division within the thing, however, plunges it into self-
contradiction: for its relations to other things are perceived to undermine
its independence as a thing and thereby to destroy it. As Hegel puts it, it
is through the thing's 'opposition that it relates itself to others, and is
essentially only this relating. The relation, however, is the negation of its
self-subsistence' (PG 103 / 76).
This is the point at which the experience of perception does, indeed,
throw up a problem close to the one Brandom examines. The two are not,
however, precisely the same. The problem faced by Brandom's Hegel is that
a world of pure relations - without relata - cannot be made intelligible.
Intelligibility is restored, however, if relations are understood to be between
properties that have an immediacy of their own.
The problem faced by perception in Hegel's account is not so easily dealt
with: for the object of perception proves to be irreducibly self-contradictory.
This is because the relation to others that undermines a thing's indepen-
dence is rooted in the very determinacy or 'absolute character' that gives the
thing its independence in the first place (PG 103 / 75-6). The thing is inde-
pendent or 'for itself' because it has its own intrinsic distinctness: 'it has its
essential difference from others in its own self [an ihm]' (PG 102 / 75). That
difference, however, differentiates the thing from other things and sets it in
relation to them. Furthermore, since that difference constitutes the very
essence of the thing, it turns the thing in its very essence into nothing but
relations to others. And yet, that difference is at the same time what gives
the thing its distinct character and independence.
This is not a contradiction that perception can avoid or 'resolve'. On the
contrary, it is what has emerged in the experience of perception itself as the
true character of its object. Perception has tried all along to avoid contradic-
tion and to preserve the self-identity of its object; but the object has now
shown itself - despite perception's best endeavours - to be 'in one and the
same respect the opposite of itself': for it is 'for itself, so far as it is for another',
and 'for another, so far as it is for itself' (PG 104 / 76). This unity of opposing
determinations Hegel calls 'unconditioned absolute universality' (PG 104 /
77). It is this idea of internally contradictory universality - not, as Brandom

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
40
suggests, a commitment to holism - that is inherited from perception by the
understanding. Brandom's own concern with holism, however, leads him to
overlook the distinctive focus of perception and so to miss the fact that its
object proves necessarily to be a self-contradictory unity.
For Brandom, Hegel's holism is governed by the law of non-contradiction:
properties are rendered fully determinate by excluding other properties and
thereby being what they are, not what they are not. The truth as the under-
standing conceives it, however, is that the fundamental determinations of
things pass immediately into their opposites and so are never just what they
are. Almost all the basic concepts that Hegel associates with the understand-
ing exhibit this structure of contradiction. The play of forces, for example,
is one in which 'each [force] is solely through the other, and what each thus
is, it immediately no longer is in being it' (PG 115 / 86); and infinity is the
'absolute unrest [ ... ] in which whatever is determined in one way or another
[ ... ] is rather the opposite of this determinateness' (PG 133 / 101). Such
contradictory statements do not show understanding misunderstanding its
world, but give expression to the truth that emerges in the experience of
understanding. As Hegel puts it, 'we have to think [ ... ] opposition within
itself, or contradiction [Widerspruch]' (PG 130 / 99). This is even true when
Hegel appears to argue at one point that understanding is committed to
holism. The play of forces, Hegel writes, is 'the whole [dies Ganze] as a whole
or as universal'. What this means, however, is not what Brandom means by
holism, but rather that things 'as they are in themselves [ ... ] immediately
[ ... ] turn into their opposite' (PG 116 / 87).
If there is no evidence that the understanding (or Hegel) subscribes to
holism as Brandom conceives it, is there any evidence that the understand-
ing (or Hegel himself at this point in the Phenomenology) subscribes to
objective idealism? This question is a little more difficult to answer, for it
involves considering the notoriously difficult transition from consciousness
to self-consciousness.
Consciousness, Self-Consciousness and Objective Idealism
Through the play of forces, Hegel argues, the understanding is brought to
understand the truth of things to be their 'inner being' (Inneres) (PG 115-
16 / 86). This inner being is known to be objective. At the same time, the
understanding recognizes that it can move beyond what is perceivable in
this way only because it does not remain passive but does something. Specif-
ically, it 'reflects itself out of the movement [of appearance] back into itself
as the True' (PG 116 / 87).
This sense of being active is heightened when the understanding turns to
the work of 'explanation' (Erklärung). The understanding enunciates a
certain law (say, the 'law of gravity') and then distinguishes from that law a
force that grounds or explains it. At the same time, however, the

PHENOMENOLOGY AND DE RE INTERPRETATION
41
understanding recognises that the distinction between 'law' and 'force' is
not a clear distinction in reality, for it declares that 'the force is constituted
exactly the same as the law' (PG 125 / 94). The understanding thus recog-
nizes that in fact 'this difference is no difference'. There is, indeed, for the
understanding, a formal distinction between 'force' and 'law', but 'both
have the same content, the same constitution' (PG 125 / 95): what is made
necessary by the postulated 'force' of gravity and what happens according
to the 'law' of gravity is precisely the same thing. The phenomenologist
concludes from this that the understanding is not actually explaining
anything and that the 'movement' of explanation 'falls only within the
understanding itself, not within the object' (PG 126 / 95, my italics). (This is
the reason, Hegel will say a few pages later, 'why "explaining" affords so
much self-satisfaction': 'because in it consciousness is, so to speak, commun-
ing directly with itself, enjoying only itself' (PG 134 / 101).)
From the perspective of the understanding, however, in drawing this
distinction that is not a distinction consciousness is explaining, and deepen-
ing its comprehension of, what is going on in the world. Understanding,
indeed, takes this very conception of a 'difference that is not a difference' to
disclose directly the inner being of things themselves. It comes to see it,
therefore, as 'the law of appearance itself that differences arise which are no
differences' (PG 126-7 / 96). In its work of explanation, the understanding
posited a difference between law and force that it knew was not a clear
difference in reality. Now it understands the world itself to generate differ-
ences that are not clear differences. This, however, brings about a dramatic
change in the way the world is understood: for it reintroduces self-
contradiction into a world that had been momentarily stabilized by the idea
of law. The first laws the understanding takes to govern the world (and in
terms of which it seeks to 'explain' phenomena) are 'the stable image of
unstable appearance' (PG 120 / 90). This new law, by contrast, guarantees
only the 'stability of instability' (or 'permanence of impermanence')
(Beständigkeit der Unbeständigkeit), because it lays down 'that what is self-
same repels itself from itself' and that 'differences are [ ... ] in reality no
differences and [ ... ] cancel themselves' (PG 126-7 / 96).
The understanding was initially led by its experience to the view that the
world is different from the way it is perceived to be. Now the world is under-
stood to be different from the way it is initially understood to be; indeed, it
is understood to be in truth the inversion of what it is initially understood to
be (PG 128-9 / 96-7). But that is not all: for the understanding comes to the
view that there is in fact just one way of understanding the world and one
world of the understanding. That world is 'the inversion of itself; it is itself
and its opposite in one unity' (PG 131 / 99, my italics). When the under-
standing conceives of the world as such a profoundly self-contradictory
unity, it conceives of it as exhibiting the structure, or rather movement, of
'infinity'.

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
42
Hegel writes that infinity has been 'the soul of all that has gone before'
(PG 133 / 101) in that previous objects of the understanding (such as the
play of forces) have involved differences that are not differences and so
have united such differences with their opposites. Now, however, the under-
standing knows explicitly that its object is infinity. It is at this point, Hegel
tells us, that consciousness becomes self-consciousness (PG 133 / 101).
Understanding already grasps itself as the movement of infinity, since it
understands itself to be the activity of 'explanation' in which it explicitly
posits a difference that is not a clear difference. Infinity appears in the guise
of the play of forces, but 'it is as "explanation"', Hegel writes, 'that it first
freely stands forth' (PG 133 / 101). When consciousness comes to under-
stand its object explicitly as infinity, therefore, the difference between its
understanding of itself and its understanding of its object collapses and it
encounters in the object the very movement that it itself is. As Hegel puts it,
'since this concept of infinity is an object for consciousness, the latter is
consciousness of a difference that is no less immediately cancelled;
consciousness is for its own self, it is a distinguishing of that which contains
no difference, or self-consciousness' (PG 134 / 102)10.
Consciousness becomes self-consciousness, therefore, because in the
movement of objective infinity it 'experiences only itself' (PG 135 / 103).
This argument, by the way, is subtly different from the one dismissed by
Brandom as the 'bad' (or 'dreadful') argument. Hegel is not inferring an
identity between consciousness and its object from a mere 'analogy'
between them. Nor is there is any mystery as to why Hegel should maintain
that consciousness encounters itself in its object, rather than objectivity
within itself (see TMD 189-90). Consciousness turns out to be self-
consciousness because it comes to understand the object to be the very same
movement of infinity that it already knows itself to be.
The question that now needs to be considered is whether this transition
to self-consciousness proves that the understanding - or Hegel - is commit-
ted to objective idealism as Brandom conceives it. Such idealism, we recall,
is the view that one cannot understand the world to be determinate unless
one understands the subjective process of acknowledging (and trying to
remove) error (TMD 196). As I see it, however, there is nothing to suggest
such idealism in the transition we have just considered: for the understanding
does not comprehend its object in and through comprehending its own activ-
ity, but understands the object to be in itself - independently - the movement
of infinity it also knows itself to be.
The understanding would be committed to something like Brandomian
idealism, if it understood its conception of the object to be dependent in
some way on its understanding of itself and its own activity. This, however,
is not the case. Understanding is, indeed, aware that it is active when
engaged in the work of explanation, but it does not see the initial idea of the
inverted world as resulting from, or as dependent on, that explanatory

PHENOMENOLOGY AND DE RE INTERPRETATION
43
activity. On the contrary, it 'learns that it is the law of appearance itself that
differences arise that are no differences' (PG 126 / 96). That is to say, it
understands that law to be out there in the world itself, not to be derived in
some way from reflection on its own activity. Even when it comes to under-
stand the object explicitly as the movement of infinity, it does not regard the
thought of such infinity as its own work. Rather, it understands infinity
simply to be the true character of the object itself.
In my view, therefore, Hegel's account of the transition from conscious-
ness to self-consciousness provides no support for the claim that the under-
standing is committed to and comes to endorse Brandomian objective
idealism. Nor, as far as I can see, does it provide any support for the claim
that Hegel is committed to such idealism. Indeed, even if the understanding
were compelled by its own experience to endorse objective idealism, this
would not mean that Hegel himself would have to endorse it, any more than
he has to endorse the perspective of the unhappy consciousness or of
conscience. In the Phenomenology Hegel traces the development of the
experience made by consciousness and shows what consciousness is
committed to by its own experience. He does not, however, assume that this
experience always at every point discloses the truth about the world (or
about the mind). The experience of consciousness does not, therefore,
require Hegel himself to adopt the world-view of the particular shape of
consciousness he is examining. Accordingly, even if such experience were to
commit consciousness to objective idealism - and in my judgement it does
not - it would not thereby require Hegel to endorse that idealism himself.
None of this, of course, directly refutes Brandom's de re argument that
Hegel is committed to idealism whether he likes it or not. My aim, however,
is not to address that argument. It is to show what follows if Hegel - and,
indeed, his reader - is understood to be doing phenomenology. Phenome-
nology, as Hegel conceives it, shows us what consciousness is committed to
by its own experience, and such experience, on my interpretation, does not
commit the understanding to objective idealism as Brandom defines it.
Moreover, even if it did, this would not commit Hegel himself or his readers
to such idealism: for we are committed to what emerges in the experience of
consciousness only when we know that such experience discloses the true
nature of being, but we know this only when consciousness turns into 'abso-
lute knowing' at the end of the book. (The task of Hegel's Logic is then to
set out precisely what absolute knowing - or speculative thought - discloses
being to be.)
If the experience of consciousness, as Hegel describes it, commits neither
the understanding nor Hegel himself to objective idealism, what is
consciousness shown to be (and not to be) committed to in the opening
chapters of Hegel's book? We learn that perception is committed as much
to the unity of differences as to exclusive difference, that neither perception
nor understanding is committed to holism (as Brandom understands it), and

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
44
that the understanding is not governed by the law of non-contradiction but
in fact understands the world to be a thoroughly contradictory place. All of
this, however, gets lost sight of in Brandom's de re interpretation of Hegel's
Phenomenology.
Concluding Thoughts
Although the experience of consciousness does not and cannot show that
Hegel is required to endorse objective idealism, there is nonetheless, from
Hegel's point of view, something right in Brandom's claim that 'the deter-
minateness of the objective world and the structured process of grasping it
are reciprocally sense dependent concepts' (TMD 208). Hegel's philosophy
proper - that is, his Logic and Realphilosophie - is evidently based on this
'idealist' principle, since the way the world is understood to be in that
philosophy is intimately bound up with the way in which speculative thought
is understood to proceed (that is, with the method of speculative philoso-
phy). It is also true, I think, of the Phenomenology that the experience of
consciousness and 'the structured process of grasping it' are reciprocally
sense dependent, insofar as Hegel's understanding of the way in which that
experience develops is intimately bound up with the way in which phenom-
enological thought is understood to proceed (that is, with the method of
phenomenology). In this sense, there is, indeed, merit in Brandom's claim
that Hegel endorses 'idealism'.11
I do not believe, however, that Hegel endorses conceptual pragmatism as
readily as Brandom does. This is because the process of understanding the
world philosophically and the experience of consciousness phenomenologi-
cally does not, in Hegel's view, involve our actively doing something in the
quite way Brandom understands this. On the contrary, it involves following
'passively' (as Hegel claims in the Encyclopaedia Logic) the immanent
development of the matter at hand.12 We must, of course, actively focus on
that immanent development and actively keep our own bright ideas at bay.
Such active 'restraint' (Enthaltsamkeit) is an indispensable condition
of philosophizing. We exercise such restraint, however, by giving up our
'freedom' to determine the course of thought, 'letting [the content] move
spontaneously of its own nature' and simply 'contemplat[ing] this move-
ment' (PG 56 / 36).
Brandom provides two accounts of the process we must go through (on
a Hegelian view of the world) if we are to understand the world to be
something determinate. In each case, thinking is understood primarily as
something that we do. In the process of 'traversing the moments', we begin
with the immediacy of a property, then we move on to consider the rela-
tions of the property to other properties, and finally we put these first two
perspectives together to understand immediacy as mediated. What is miss-
ing in the process Brandom describes, however, is any genuine dialectic:

PHENOMENOLOGY AND DE RE INTERPRETATION
45
immediacy is not understood to become determinate itself through its own
immanent logic (as happens in fact in the opening chapters of both the
Phenomenology and the Logic); but we are understood to make immedi-
acy intelligible in terms of its mediating relations (TMD 206). Brandom
quotes Hegel as saying that 'the movement of a being that immediately is,
consists partly in becoming an other than itself' (TMD 206; see also PG
51 / 32); but all Brandom can hear in these lines is Hegel 'struggling [ ... ]
to say something that we can now put in somewhat clearer terms', and so
the distinctive point Hegel is making gets lost.
Traversing the moments is a specific form of the more generic process of
acknowledging error and then acknowledging an obligation to 'remove or
repair the incompatibility' (TMD 193). This is the process Brandom
describes as that of 'experience' (TMD 196, 207). Once again emphasis is
placed by Brandom on what we do, or what consciousness does: error is to
be avoided by actively altering one's commitments oneself (TMD 193).
The idea that consciousness necessarily develops in a certain way that is
determined by the very form of its object - that the experience of percep-
tion, for example, is driven forward by the 'play of abstractions' inherent in
the form of its own object - is not given prominence (see PG 105 / 77;
TMD 384).13
It should also be noted that experience, for Brandom, involves altering
one's commitments in order to avoid contradiction. This conception of expe-
rience is, however, hard to square with Hegel's view that 'contradiction is
the root of all movement and vitality'.14 It is also at odds with the experience
undergone by the understanding: for what that experience teaches is that
'we have to think [ ... ] contradiction' (PG 130 / 99). Brandom's conception
of experience does, however, match that of perception. At least, it agrees
with what perception thinks experience should be: for perception seeks to
avoid contradictions and recognizes that if contradictions emerge in the way
it sees the world, it is up to it to 'correct' (korrigieren) its mistaken view of
things (PG 99 / 72). As we have seen, perception is eventually led by its
experience - despite its best endeavours - to regard its object as the contra-
dictory unity of opposing moments Hegel calls 'unconditioned absolute
universality' (PG 104 / 77). It also fails to realize the extent to which its expe-
rience is driven by the 'play of abstractions' that constitute its object. None-
theless, from the point of view of perception itself, experience essentially
involves actively correcting itself - or 'altering' its commitments - in order
to avoid error and contradiction.
This suggests the following concluding thoughts: Brandom by no means
reduces Hegel's view of the world to that of perception - his problematic
accounts of Hegel's 'idealism' and of the process of 'traversing the
moments' are clear evidence of that. Nonetheless, Brandom understands
Hegel's philosophical position to be based on, and to overlap in significant
ways with, that of perception. He takes them to overlap in this way because

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
46
he thinks that in the chapter on perception Hegel is giving us the fundamen-
tals of his own understanding of the world, rather than just showing us the
consequences of viewing the world as perception does. And he thinks this,
because he does not take full account of the fact that Hegel is doing
phenomenology there, rather than presenting his own philosophy. Brandom
makes a good case for the legitimacy of his de re interpretation of Hegel. In
my view, however, his failure to recognize what Hegel is really up to in the
Phenomenology leads him to present a picture of Hegel which, for all its
subtlety, is a distorted one.
University of Warwick, UK
Notes
1 See Robert B. Brandom, Tales of the Mighty Dead: Historical Essays in the Meta-
physics of Intentionality (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2002).
Further references to this book will be given in the text in the following form:
TMD 194.
2 See Robert B. Pippin, 'Brandom's Hegel', in E. Hammer (ed.) German Idealism:
Contemporary Perspectives (London: Routledge, 2007), p. 174.
3 For my account of the differences between Brandom and Hegel that become
apparent if one looks to Hegel's Science of Logic, rather than to his Phenome-
nology, see Stephen Houlgate, 'Hegel and Brandom on Norms, Concepts and
Logical Categories', in German Idealism: Contemporary Perspectives, pp. 137-52.
4 G. W. F. Hegel, Phänomenologie des Geistes, ed. E. Moldenhauer and K. M.
Michel, Werke in zwanzig Bänden, Vol. 3 (Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp Verlag,
1970), pp. 76-7; G. W. F. Hegel, Phenomenology of Spirit, trans. A.V. Miller
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1977), pp. 53-4. Further references to the
Phenomenology will be given in the text in the following form: PG 76-7 / 53-4
(with the German page numbers given first). I have occasionally altered Miller's
translation.
5 See Hegel, PG 87 / 62: 'Sense-certainty thus comes to know by experience [ ... ]',
and 90 / 64: 'the dialectic of sense-certainty is nothing else but the simple history
of its movement or of its experience'.
6 For my more detailed account of the method of Hegelian phenomenology, and
of the role played in it by the 'we', see Stephen Houlgate, An Introduction to
Hegel: Freedom, Truth and History (1991) (Oxford: Blackwell, 2005), pp. 48-66.
7 Ibid., p. 63.
8 See Pippin, 'Brandom's Hegel', pp. 156, 160.
9 Ibid., p. 160.
10 Hegel notes that understanding initially 'falls short of infinity as such' in so far as
infinity remains for it veiled by a 'sensuous covering' (PG 134 / 102). In this
respect, understanding is only implicitly self-conscious. Once this covering falls
away, however, and the object shows itself to be infinity as such, consciousness
becomes explicitly self-conscious.
11 For a more detailed account of the method of both Hegel's speculative logic and
his phenomenology, see Houlgate, An Introduction to Hegel, Chs 2 and 3.
12 See G. W. F. Hegel, The Encyclopaedia Logic. Part 1 of the Encyclopaedia of
Philosophical Sciences with the Zusätze, trans. T. F. Geraets, W. A. Suchting and

PHENOMENOLOGY AND DE RE INTERPRETATION
47
H. S. Harris (Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing, 1991), p. 305 [§238 Addition].
See also Houlgate, 'Hegel and Brandom on Norms, Concepts and Logical
Categories', pp. 148-9.
13 A similar point is made by Brian O'Connor in his article 'Hegel's Phenomenol-
ogy and the Question of Semantic Pragmatism', The Owl of Minerva 38(1-2),
(2006-7), pp. 127-43. See especially p. 132: 'Each phase of experience is
produced by a rational compulsion' and p. 134: 'revisions which are compelled
by the experience of an unsatisfactory judgement'.
14 G. W. F. Hegel, Science of Logic, trans. A.V. Miller (Amherst, NY: Humanity
Books, 1999), p. 439.

