Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology
ISSN: 0007-1773 (Print) 2332-0486 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rbsp20
Speaking after the Phenomenon: the Promise of
Things and the Future of Phenomenology
Felix Ó Murchadha
To cite this article: Felix Ó Murchadha (2017) Speaking after the Phenomenon: the Promise of
Things and the Future of Phenomenology, Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology,
48:2, 99-115, DOI: 10.1080/00071773.2016.1272256
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00071773.2016.1272256
Published online: 17 Jan 2017.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 414
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rbsp20

Speaking after the Phenomenon: the Promise of Things and
the Future of Phenomenology
Felix Ó Murchadha
Philosophy in the School of Humanities, National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland
ABSTRACT
Phenomenology speaks not directly of phenomena but rather of the
appearing of phenomena. In so speaking it moves from the level of
things with generic or proper names to the level of universal terms.
In speaking and thinking the phenomenon Phenomenology comes
"after" in the twofold sense of being too late and desiring for that
which is to come. This paper explores this place of phenomenology
with respect to the relation of faith and reason, the manner of
speaking phenomenologically and the affective and temporal
situation of experience. Drawing on the pre-modern concept of the
transcendentals and on an account of emphatic consciousness of
things, this article argues that the future of phenomenology is as a
form of metaphysics which remains focused on experience and the
"promise" of things that guides and structures perception.
Phenomenology speaks primarily not of phenomena but of the appearing of phenomena.
In so speaking it moves from the level of things with generic or proper names, the level of
things which are present or potentially so, to the level of universal terms and that which
cannot be made contemporary, a past which was never present and a future which will
never be fulfilled. This change of view happens within experience leading us to think meta-
physically, but a metaphysics which can validate itself at the tribunal of experience. This
situation which grounds phenomenology can be expressed in the preposition "after"
understood in its twofold sense: coming later and going in pursuit. In speaking of the
appearing of what appears, phenomenology is a response to that which remains always
past and aims towards that which is forever to come. In this sense, phenomenology is a
passion and against any superficial Cartesian reading of its project, it has always been a
radical rejection of the account of philosophy as self-fulfilling act. Speaking after as striving
is motivated by desire, which again needs to be heard in a twofold manner: To desire is to
lack - only through absence is there desire; but to desire is already to have the absent as
excess, as that which exceeds what is present.
We have then a constellation of three spheres: time (the temporality of "after"), desire
(the dynamics of lack and excess) and language (the expression of what is in speech). The
relation of these three spheres to each other is the theme of this article. The question is how
to speak philosophically, which means how to speak when the very resources of speech in
© 2017 The British Society for Phenomenology
CONTACT Felix Ó. Murchadha
Felix.omurchadha@nuigalway.ie
Philosophy in the School of Humanities, National
University of Ireland, University Road, Galway, Ireland
THE JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY, 2017
VOL. 48, NO. 2, 99-115
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00071773.2016.1272256

its directedness towards phenomena are themselves in question, how to speak while
remembering both that speaking seeks grounds, reasons, and that speaking cannot but
aim for that which it seems unable to attain, namely the thing glimpsed in that silence
which is somewhat clumsily expressed by the little word "after".
This article is divided into three sections with a brief conclusion. The first section begins
with the question of seeking grounds, but in doing so shows that a phenomenological
account of speaking as logos, reason, shows the interdependence of faith and reason.
This is so because speaking of phenomena is speaking of that which is promised in the
thing which gives itself to appearance (I). The second section discusses how we can
speak phenomenologically, i.e. on the level not of what appears but of the appearing of
appearance, and there it is shown how such speaking retrieves the pre-modern account
of transcendentals (II). The transcendentals do not simply express the appearing of
appearance, but rather the modes in which appearing is alluring, draws the perceiving
self to the self-giving thing. This requires an account of empathy which is aware of the
temporal structure of a being past which makes possible the presence of things as self-
expression (III).
1. Faith
Thinking and speaking come after the event, do not begin at the beginning but rather
begin with that which is already given, already manifest. To reason is to seek grounds,
but always on the basis of what has been given. In other words, to reason is already to
express faith, faith in an origin which is not mine. Faith here is something other than
belief. A belief can be stated propositionally: I believe that my coffee mug is on the
desk. Reasoning is hardly possible without the articulation of such beliefs. But faith
cannot be expressed in this way. It is rather a prior act of trust in that through which
the content of such belief is made present. Such trust is rooted in love - first and foremost
self-love, most particularly love of my own body,1 but also love of others as things in the
world. By love here is meant an openness towards and a binding of oneself to that towards
which the self is directed; both a self-giving and a desire for self-giving.2
Being directed towards things in their appearing requires a loving openness towards
things in their own self-expression, as they radiate towards us. While it is true that for
something to appear is for it to appear to someone, more fundamentally it is for that
thing to express itself as a singular promise of being itself.3 My faith in the world is my
trust in that promise of things. As Merleau-Ponty puts it: "To perceive is suddenly to
commit an entire future of experiences in a present which never strictly speaking guaran-
tees that future, it is placing one's faith in the world."4 My faith in the world is the trust
that things in the world have the promise which they appear to have and that promise is
1 This theme of love of the body as foundational to thought and existence is to be found in fundamental documents of
both Greek Philosophy and Judeo-Christianity. Aristotle begins the Metaphysics speaking of the "delight (agapesis) we
take in our senses; for even apart from their usefulness they are loved (agapontai) for themselves" (Metaphysics, 980a2);
St Paul in the Letter to the Ephesians states: "no man ever yet hated his own flesh; but nourished and cherished it, even
as the Lord the church: For we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones" (Ephesians 5: 29-30).
2 Love in other words, which is to be understood both erotically and agapeically; see on this theme Ó Murchadha, 'Love's
Conditions'.
3 On this theme see Landes, Merleau-Ponty and the Paradoxes of Expression, 96-98.
4 Merleau-Ponty, Phenomenology of Perception, 297.
100
F. Ó MURCHADHA

the yet to come of the thing in its relations to me and the world. There is nothing which
appears to me without some promise to come to be in a certain way, and my understand-
ing of things is in terms of how they may fulfil that promise: whether a rock on a mountain
stream is safe to step on, whether the river will be flowing with salmon for my fishing,
whether the person blocking my way will politely move at my request or whether the
other side of the ball will be red, whether the back of the building will be in harmony
with its façade. Perception in the widest sense is a process precisely because the
promise of the thing is not immediately evident and whether it will fulfil its promise is
something which I cannot know in the present. My faith is an openness to the possible
fulfilments of the promise of the thing; perception in that sense is anticipatory.5 As
such, faith in the world is trust in the promise of the world.6
To talk of the promise of things may seem a loose way of speaking. A promise is after all
a pledge which is entered into only by a responsible, rational being, i.e. a being which can
commit itself into the future to be true to a declaration made in the present. Clearly - to
return to the examples above - neither the rock nor the river nor the ball nor the building
can do this and not so much the person blocking my way as social convention promises
that he will let me pass. However, fundamental to promising is that the promising thing
expresses in the present that a possible future ought to come about through the power of
its being and that there is a binding (although uncertain) connection between the thing in
the present and that future. Such expression need not be deliberate, need not be conscious
in fact, and does not require a self-responsible agent to make it. It is in this sense that we
talk of a child as a promising tennis player or an event as promising, or the cloudless sky as
promising of a good day for a mountain hike. What is meant is that without any reference
to conscious agency (even the child swinging the racket may have no idea of being a tennis
player), a particular thing indicates in certain qualities of its being a specific possible
future. Promising in this sense is characteristic of all things and refers both to the thing
itself and to the one for whom the thing holds promise. A peach promises to be sweet
and juicy: this refers to my desire to taste it, it is promising for me only because I have
that desire and certain taste-memories. But it also refers to the peach: the colour and
texture of the peach expresses the promise of being sweet and juicy. If I taste it and it is
sour, I may throw it away angrily because it has not fulfilled its promise to me. To be
angry with the peach is irrational if we think that its promise is a conscious thing, but
really it is not: the peach was deceptive, it appears to be what it was not, it promised
what it did not deliver.
A thing does not promise in isolation; its promise is the self-explicating of the thing in
relation to itself and to others. For a thing to have promise is for that thing to be in relation
both to itself and to others, that is to be a self. Again, it may be objected that only certain
"things" are selves, those which are subjects, self-conscious beings. But to be a self means
minimally to be in relation to itself, to others and to its own origins and ends. A tree relates
to itself in the manner in which its leaves and root systems are each directed towards its
nourishment, it relates to the sun by turning towards it and the wind by turning away from
it, it relates to its origins and its ends as the limits of its existing being. None of this appears
to be fully conscious of course, but we can say of a tree that it has needs in terms of water,
5 See Husserl, Erste Philosophie, 45.
6 Cf. Bergson, who speaks of perception in terms of the promise or danger in the object. Matter and Memory, 32, 57.
THE JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
101

sunlight, depth of soil; that it can be harmed by having its bark cut; that it is a sapling or an
ancient oak; that it is flourishing or doing badly and in saying this we are speaking of the
tree as a self, as a being which relates to its environment and itself, has needs required for it
to flourish.7 In the semi-dormancy8 of its self-relation the tree is a self which responds to
itself, to others and its origins and ends as that which concerns it. In a similar way, a desk
needs certain climatic conditions, is threatened by fire, wobbles when placed on an uneven
surface. Again, we can speak here of the desk having needs, and these needs are the modes
of the desk's self-relation to itself in the world. In the case of the desk this is a slumbering
self-relation and while that slumber is presumably permanent, the self-relation and the
relation to the world is no less real: difficulties in one respect (say, overly damp conditions)
may in time effect it in other respects of itself (say its legs crumble and collapse). It is of
course with self-aware beings, with certain animals including us humans that we can speak
of awakened self-relations. If we as human beings have a certain privilege here, it derives
from that which only certain other animals seem to perform and then only minimally: hes-
itation.9 To hesitate is to falter in response due to some inhibiting thought or sentiment.
The origins of the word are to be found in the Latin verb for stammering (haesitare) and it
is hard to see how language itself would be possible without hesitation, without the
drawing back of the self in the face of its relations. Out of such hesitation comes wakeful-
ness; faltering in its forward movement, such a self becomes aware of its relations to
objects (intentional relations). Such awareness takes the initial form of interest. It recog-
nizes itself in relations of interest with things and also the relation of other selves to those
same things. However, more than that, it recognizes itself and those others with whom it
shares a common belonging in relation to things which call on it for response in various
and diverse ways. The hesitation in the face of a thing allows the self to recognize in that
thing and in itself a self which has a name, a nature and an integrity.
To perceive things as appearing in this way, as selves, and see this in hesitation, is that
which allows us to sense the other thing both as that which moves us towards or away
from it and as that which moves us through its own self, the radiation of its own being.
A thing presents to a perceiving being a surface which invites that being to explore it
further, or perhaps repels it or indeed leaves it indifferent. Each of these modes are
modes of promising: the thing attracts us as something functional for us, as something
giving pleasure to us or as something which we desire to know better, or the thing
repels us as that which is of no use to us, which causes displeasure or which we have
no desire to know. The thing may promise this of itself or of something else. In the
first case that which it promises is an expression of itself. It promises to be a certain
manner of thing or to express in itself certain qualities. It shows itself in that way to be
a possible source of pleasure or of displeasure, of satisfaction or of dissatisfaction, of fulfil-
ment or of ruin. In each case there is a correlation between the thing's promise and the
mode of being of the perceiving self, but in this correlation is disclosed the promise of
7 On this question see Stone, Should Trees have Standing?, 11 and the fascinating account of the life of trees in Wohlleben,
The Hidden Life of Trees.
8 Half-awake in the sense of responding to its environment, half-asleep in the sense of not doing so with any self-aware-
ness, a tree shares dormancy with non-living things, but also wakefulness with a dog or a human being. There are many
differences of degree among entities in the world, but at the level of complete dormancy in the form of inorganic things
the boundaries and self and other become much more fluid to the point of apeiron - being without boundary and hence
without self.
9 On this question see Al-Saji, 'When Thinking Hesitates'.
102
F. Ó MURCHADHA

the thing as exceeding the correlative perspective of the perceiver. For a climber a rock
promises a challenging climb, but that in the rock which makes it a challenging climb
can also for a non-climber express its beauty, its grandeur; for a geologist, its origins
and nature; for a photographer, the perfect foreground of a photo, etc.10 The thing prom-
ises more than what any one perspective can contain. When the thing is promising in
relation to something else, when it functions as a sign of that thing, we are not drawn
so much to it as to that of which it is a sign. But this is not a clear-cut distinction. We
see this in particular in the case of religious signs: the pages of an illuminated manuscript,
icons of Christ or the sacraments of certain religions promise pleasure in themselves and
attract the self towards them as incarnations of that which surpasses them, the invisible
divinity itself.
Understanding things in the promise of their being requires of the self not only a trust
in that promise, but a subjection of its own instinctive drives in respect to the thing. At the
level of drives, the self responds to things in the world in a generalized manner. The
instinctive drive for food or instinctive aggression towards a threat or sexual drive are
responses which map out things in the world in generalized forms: that which can be con-
sumed and that which cannot, those who are threatening and those who are not, the
objects of sexual interest and those who are not. At this generalized level, nonetheless,
the thing is perceived dynamically as promising a nourishment for the self or as threaten-
ing its survival or as a source of pleasure. The self learns of its instincts through that which
elicits them; it becomes an instinctive being through responding to that which calls on its
inborn drives. The thing appears to the self as that thing which elicits action from it: the act
of killing a living embodied being and transforming it into a flesh to be eaten; the act of
copulating with a woman or man who attracts a sexual response. The generalized structure
of instinctive drive shows to the self a general structure of its own being which seems more
primordial than the ego. Its instinctive feelings open it to a general structure of itself, that
of generalized needs and desires of which the ego is only passively aware. Such instinctive
being in the world is not the final word, but it is fundamental to all which can be under-
stood of the human. As Husserl says: "Reason itself is transformed instinct (verwandelter
Instinkt), instinctive affection and intention goes through all rational life".11 Instinct is
transformed through repetition, through the repeating of a pattern of drive and satisfac-
tion; instinctive life is given an order which is constitutive of the lifeworld in which the self
finds itself. In seeing the repetitions within instinct itself - the repeated need for food, for
example - the self discovers in itself a pattern, an order and the world can guarantee and
maintain that order. Where that order is lost, we strive to regain it, we strive to find
another pattern of repetition. Inherent in the instinctive drive is a discrimination
between things. At its most basic level this discrimination is between that which attracts
and that which repels and between that which can dominate the self and that which the self
can dominate. The development of the self's affective relations involves the refinement of
these generalized modes of being through the development of more and more fine-grained
forms of affective response to things in the world which in becoming more discriminating
10 Cf. Sartre, Being and Nothingness, 627; C. Romano, Au coeur de la raison, 610-15. The term "correlation" here is one which
can be found within the work of Husserl, Heidegger and Merleau-Ponty. The allusion to Meillassoux's, After Finitude is, of
course, deliberate.
11 Husserl, Grenzprobleme der Phänomenologie, 134.
THE JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
103

allow the self to affectively distinguish things in the singularity of their kinds, specific
natures and finally their own singular being.
In recognizing the promise of the thing, the self reserves itself obediently before the
thing. Such obedience - literally such listening to (ob-audire) - is fundamental to all
relations with things: even the killer obeys the promise of particular vulnerabilities in
his victim. There is in any such relations with things the need for a certain ascetics, i.e.
a relation of working of the self on itself, to prepare that self for that manner of appearing
of the thing.12 Such ascetics require of the self above all the capacity to wait upon the thing,
to let the thing become itself before me. It requires also a continual examination of the
self's own-most habits of thought, speaking and action. It does so because habits tend
to reduce such obedience to the general structure of things by translating the givenness
of things into learned patterns which are ideally both transparent and predictable,
mapping out the future possibility of the thing in terms of an image of that thing. The
danger here is that of reducing things to caricatures of themselves and in so doing occlud-
ing the singularity of the thing of experience. This danger is inherent in thinking and in
speaking and is indeed fundamental to language itself. What Heidegger terms "idle talk"13
is nothing other than the replacement of the thing's promise with caricatured and petrify-
ing images of it. Phenomenological thought, if it is to uncover the appearing of the appear-
ance of the thing, needs to find a way beyond such caricatures and beyond the simply
instinctive response to things, to find a language which both responds to the promise of
things and allows us to speak of this response philosophically.
2. Transcendentals
The question here is twofold: how do we speak such that we are true to the thing in the
promise of its being and how can we speak philosophically, at a meta-level so to speak,
about this relation. The promise of things is a call, a solicitation. Things solicit us with
more or less intensity. In soliciting us, in alluring us to them, things appear to us in
certain ways, calling for our attention. That which calls us in the thing is its appearing
to us, it radiating of a certain way of being which seeks a response. That response is
one which occurs on the trajectory of attraction and repulsion, whereby this "trajectory"
is rather an ambiguity, a kind of doubling in experience, whereby the opposition is not
between attraction and repulsion but rather between these two and indifference or inatten-
tion.14 In speaking of things in this experience, the mode of speech is not one of simple
propositional description, but rather that mode which expresses already a being moved
by things, which Chrétien terms la parole blessée, wounded speech:
Wounded by this listening and this summons which always already preceded it, that discloses
it to itself in this truth always suffering, always agonal ... which means that speech is all the
more confident the least sure it is of its own capacities.15
12 On this topic see Ó Murchadha, A Phenomenology of Christian Life, 145-47; see also Husserl, Grenzprobleme der Phäno-
menologie, 129.
13 Heidegger, Being and Time, § 35.
14 This doubling of attraction and repulsion is one which Rudolf Otto identifies with the numinous. See Otto, The Idea of the
Holy, 62-63, 73, 163-64. For Otto, the numinous is not a realm of things but that mode of appearing of things which
breaks with the mundane, the "natural" in his terms. The numinous in this sense is a mode of appearing of things which
breaks with the caricaturing context of habitual practice.
15 Chretien, The Ark of Speech, 37.
104
F. Ó MURCHADHA

In other words, speaking is a passion, a response to the world as that place in which the self
perceives (listens to) things in suffering them. Understood in this way speaking does not
begin with an inner intention which then gets articulated, nor does speaking involve
simply the participation of the self in the interplay of sameness and difference in a
language game. Rather, to speak is to acknowledge the anteriority in being of that
which summons it and to open the speaking self to the thing as that which can draw it
into itself. Speaking gestures before any propositional statement and this lies at the
heart of Chrétien's claim (quoting St. Augustine) that "desire prays always even when
language is silent".16 Indeed, arguably prayer discloses something essential about speaking.
Already Proclus pointed out a strange circularity in prayer: "those who pray ought ﬁrst to
render thanks to the gods for the very fact that he has received from the gods the power
to turn towards them".17 This circularity of prayer is instructive for language as such: to
speak is to respond to that which ﬁrst turns us towards it and the very capacity to speak is
impossible without that which our words attempt to express. To imagine otherwise is to
betray the very heart of language itself, namely the bringing to articulation that ﬁrst sensed
in the thing itself, that which is the gift of the thing. As such, all speech is a giving thanks,
all speaking begins and ends in prayer.
Speaking is address, address to another which responds to a prior solicitation. But what
then makes possible this address, what is it that gives us the sense that our words do more
than simply express inchoate sounds or even meanings which we share, but actually serve
to articulate an appearance to which it owes its being? Clearly words can be expressive, but
by the same token they can often become simply images or caricatures. They are not saved
from this by any potency of words themselves, but by something more fundamental. To
find this we need to work through a phenomenological reduction as it concerns language.
The phenomenological reduction is not simply a leading back to appearances, but more
importantly to the principle of appearance, to the appearing of appearance, to that
which is first in and of appearance. Appearance is always of this or that, but the appearing
is not characterized by the qualities of that which appears. The appearing of a dog, for
example, has nothing dog-like about it. It makes perfect phenomenological sense to say
as Heidegger does that the world worlds, or that the thing things,18 but it would be non-
sense to say that a dog dogs! To express the appearing of a dog one needs to think in a way
which will make sense of the wordliness and the thingliness of the dog, that is what it is for
a dog to appear in the event of appearing. To express that we need words which have to do
not with that which appears, but with the appearing itself, the principles by which it
appears. In attempting this, Phenomenology encounters a problem which lies at the
core of philosophical reflection, namely how to think those first principles on the basis
of which all knowledge is possible. This is not a question of foundations; rather, founda-
tional thought is a way of responding to this question. The problem is that philosophy
cannot justify its beginning in the same manner as that which it says on the basis of its
beginning and it cannot do so because its beginning is never contemporary with that
which it is thinking. While I can say that the glass is on the table and in doing so can,
so to speak, reproduce that snapshot of the glass now on the table, I cannot do the
16 Augustine, Sermon LXXX, quoted in ibid., 29.
17 Proclus, 'Commentary on Timaeus', quoted in ibid., 24-25.
18 Heidegger, 'The Thing', 178-80.
THE JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
105

same for the origin of the appearing of things, the how of the appearing of glass or table or
uponness. To think that question, I need to speak differently in a manner already reflected
in prayer. But while prayer simply lays open my lateness, reflection on this situation needs
to ask what is it about appearing which is irreducible, which I cannot get behind. In the
thirteenth century, as part of the response to Aristotle and Arab philosophy, the Scholas-
tics began to practice in philosophy a process in some senses similar to the reduction
which they termed resolutio: the attempt to work thinking backwards to those ideas
which are primary, cannot be preceded in thought. Those ideas were termed "inteniones",
intentions. It is important to see here that the "intentions" in question were neither sub-
jective nor objective, but rather those ideas without which the intelligibility of things
would be lost.19 The first such idea according to some (e.g. Albert the Great) is the
good, for others (e.g. Thomas Aquinas) being. In either case, these ideas were termed
"transcendentals" because they refer to that through which things are and according to
which things can be thought. In this sense the transcendentals form the openness of
thought and speech to things as they give themselves to be thought and spoken of. The
crucial point here is that although I can be present to a dog or a tree or an explosion I
cannot be present to being, one, truth, good, beauty; rather, I am present to things and
things are present to me by virtue of such transcendentals.20
Transcendentals are not general terms, in the sense that they are not generic terms of
which we find instances in reality. Such words as "being", "one", "truth", "good" and
"beauty" are not of things of which we can find instances: I can show or point to a par-
ticular dog or painting or rock, but I cannot show or point to a particular one, good,
true, beauty, but at most one thing, a good thing, a true thing, a beautiful thing.21
While the word "cup" or "human being" or "daffodil" can be used only of a limited
sphere of entities, these transcendental terms can be thought of as expressing that
which is the condition of the appearance of any entity. Nothing can appear without
that which being, one, truth, good, beauty, express. This is so because each of these
words are in a very real sense convertible. They are convertible but not synonymous,
not as Kant claimed tautologous, but rather each transcendental "manifest the different
'faces' of being".22
The transcendentals refer to intentions. The intention of the thing is that which it gives
to thought, that about the thing which expresses it in a manner that can be understood, is
meaningful. It does this in a manner which differs from the way in which the thing can be
meaningful as a particular kind of thing. When we use language propositionally, as in
stating of this room that it is rectangular, of this vessel that it is made of glass, of this
person that she is ill, the tendency of such usage is to express a presence and a substitutable
object. "Room", "vessel", "person", are things I can point to, but that which I point to is a
19 Albert the Great, for example, speaks of "the most general and common" intentions. See Aertsen, Medieval Philosophy
and the Transcendentals, 50.
20 My concern here is systematic rather than historical, although a rethinking of the historical trajectory from Albert the
Great to Kant (and beyond to Maritain) in respect of the transcendentals would potentially be a very rewarding
project. In this context my concern is limited to the suggestiveness of the medieval account of the transcendentals
for a language of phenomenological reflection.
21 This is also true of qualities more generally, e.g. smoothness, brightness, harshness, etc. However, while these qualities
signify in a restricted sensory field (smoothness - touch, brightness - vision, harshness - hearing, and so on) the trans-
cendentals concern appearing as such.
22 Cf. ibid, 429.
106
F. Ó MURCHADHA

particular instantiation of that thing. There are other rooms, other vessels, other persons
and my words are such that they can be employed at other times and places to refer to such
other things. Language remains at the level of appearances, giving sense to that which
appears. The transcendentals function differently and this indicates their ontological
and cognitive significance.
The transcendentals are universal in transcending the specificity of any particular kind
of entity and by the same token open up entities in their totality to the thinking, speaking
and being of the self in its self-transcendence. Heidegger already in Being and Time points
to this and shows the manner in which Aquinas' account of the transcendentals gives
expression to Aristotle's statement (itself tracing Parmenides' enigmatic claim that
thought and being are the same) that the soul is in a certain sense being (ta onta).23
While particular arts and sciences are directed towards certain types of entities and our
sense capacities are directed towards entities as visual, aural, tactile or olfactory appear-
ances, thinking, speaking and being are directed towards things in their thingliness and
worldliness. As such, the transcendentals form a fundamental openness towards things
and that openness in things through which there is appearance.
Let us say a robin lands close to my feet. I can of course describe its movement, its
colour, etc. However, if I want to express the appearing of its appearance, then I need
to try to express what it is for that robin to appear, what in its appearance traces its
coming to appear. What seems to be most obvious and most primitive is that the robin
is, the robin exists. While I can now see it, hear it, touch it, its being is anterior to all of
that. It is only due to its being that it can appear. Its being is a contingency, there is in
this self-disclosing robin before me nothing which makes necessary its own being. It is
through the contingency of its own coming to be. When I see it, I see it in the contingency
of that being. However, contingency does not mean accident: its being is not an accident of
any underlying thing or substance;24 rather, the contingency of its being expresses that
which is universal, that which is singularly and uniquely expressed in it and in all appear-
ing entities. Being in this sense is not transcending in that it signifies something separable
from things, but rather it runs through all things.25 This contingency is beyond all reason,
all grounds. The robin as this singular entity is in its being without why. In this sense, the
robin is unsubstitutable: there is only this contingently manifest robin, it surpasses in its
coming to be anything which the word "robin" expresses, because what the word tries to
capture in that expression of being is this entity without which the noun, the proper name
remains an empty sign. The being of the thing is that to which I have opened myself and
which in appearing has opened itself to me. This mutual opening is in each case that which
surpasses me and surpasses it. Its being is not its alone; rather, it is by its being, its being is
that which it receives in the most radical sense: it appears to me as the expression of its
own having received being which makes possible its own relation to itself and to the
world. Its own expression of that original reception radiates from it; it manifests here
uniquely, momentarily, what it is to be. In this sense the thing in showing itself shows
itself as a mode of receiving being. That mode of receiving being cannot be grasped by
abstraction or by deduction, but rather by perceiving the thing in the singularity of its
23 Being and Time, 13 (H. 14).
24 See Eckhart, Prologue to the Opus tripartium, 152-53.
25 Cr. Aquinas, De virtutibus in commune, 2 ad 8: "in transcendens, quae circumeunt omnes ens", quoted in Aersten, op. cit.,
p. 93.
THE JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
107

being as a unique making manifest of being. This unique making manifest of being (but
also the making manifest of the other transcendentals) I will call, borrowing from the
poet Gerald Manley Hopkins, "selving".26 All things in being selves make being manifest
in themselves and in doing so appear to me as an unfolding of their self-relation to their
own being.
To appear in its own being is to appear in this sense as one. To appear as one is to
appear in the integrity of its own being. The robin appears to me as this one robin, as
this robin which is not anything other than itself, as having a boundary of itself which
marks it from that which is other than it. Such boundaries and such integrity are not a
matter of the way we "carve up" the world; rather, the words - nouns - we use are imper-
fect ways of responding to this prior sense of the oneness of the thing. Again, this oneness
does not imply something separate or indeed an indivisible monad. The one as self is in its
(awakened or dormant) self relation: the one, in other words, is always two: the thing as it
shows itself and as it is to itself. That which shows itself as one is that thing which shows
itself in the unity of its own being. In its selving it appears as that which is both what it
shows itself and what remains unseen. Again, this oneness is not that which appears to
me; rather, the thing can only appear to me as a manifestation of its oneness. The
oneness of the thing is its own appearing to be in the unity of the being which it promises
to be.
The thing appears to me in its truth. To say of something that it is true is to say more of
it than that it is and that it is one. When we speak of a true diamond, a true athlete, a true
fossil, we are speaking of it as appearing as it is, giving itself to be what it is.27 This truth is a
promise - the true fossil is one which promises to disclose a world which is past, but which
like a ruin presents that past world in its own passing. A true athlete is one who discloses
the promise of athleticism without deception. In showing itself the thing is other than
itself, is a relation to itself and that self relation is a space for untruths of different
forms: deception, dissimulation as well as concealment. As true, the self shows itself in
the space of its own relation to the perceiving self. The perceiving self can only see the
phenomenon in these terms, in terms of its own relation to the world. The truth of the
thing in its relation to others appears as it is or as it is not. In appearing as it is or as it
is not the thing shows itself to the perceiving self in relation to that self's interests and con-
cerns. What is true here is not a quality of propositions, but rather a mode of appearing of
the thing. The true appearance of the thing is its mode of appearing and the worldiness of
that appearance. A straight stick under water will appear bent because of the mode in
which it appears, gives itself to vision. The thing appears truly for a being which is
open to the thing and desires to behold it as it is.
To perceive the thing as itself is to perceive it as it gives itself to be. Such a givenness is a
promise not only to be in some sense, not only to be one and true, but also to be good. To
be a self is to manifest the goodness of that self, to manifest what it is to be a rock, or a tree,
or a soldier or a lover. To be good in this sense is to be true to the promise of that which the
thing is. That which the thing is, is the promise of its being in relation to that being which
it has received. We perceive things in the world as for the most part unchanging in their
relation to that goodness to which they relate in the passivity of their being. Even within
26 See in particular poem 57, "When kingfishers catch fire", The Poems of Gerald Manley Hopkins, 90.
27 See Heidegger, 'On the Essence of Truth', 137-38.
108
F. Ó MURCHADHA

human life this is for the most part the case. Nevertheless, reflection on the good as we
receive it opens up a space of receptivity in which the self takes responsibility for that
reception. The goodness of my being is for me a choice and in the case of the moral
beings this is complicated by the dual possibilities of self-love and love of the law as
Kant saw.28 Kierkegaard further complicates this picture by introducing the leap of
faith which is motivated neither by self-love nor love of the law, but by the singular call
of love.29 We might complicate this picture further by introducing the consideration of
authenticity: the self's good as its singular expression of its own being, oneness and
truth, which we might understand in, for example, questions of sexual orientation and
gender selection. Understood dynamically, the good is that being towards itself, in
which the self appears to itself and to others in its responsive relation to what it has
always already received and its refiguring of that anteriority of itself in relation to a
future which remains unfulfilled.
The thing appears to me in its beauty. Stendhal defines beauty as the "promise of hap-
piness".30 The first keys of a piano sonata, the glimpse of the willow tree in the evening
sun, the figure of my lover in the distance, in all cases I find myself beholden to that
which appears to me in beauty. Its beauty is not a property of the thing as the sound of
notes, the smoothness of the bark, the bearing of the woman are, but rather the mode
of its expression as that which attracts me to it. But in each case the beauty of the thing
is the mode by which I am taken in by it, allured and enraptured by it. The beauty of
the thing is that which fascinates me, places me in its spell. However, that which captivates
me is not that the thing is a particular manifestation of beauty, but rather that the thing's
appearance to me expresses itself as promising not pleasure alone, but also to make the
world for me a happy place. However, this promise is not to be understood egotistically:
the beauty of the thing challenges me to accept the world as given to me by the object of
beauty. Beauty transforms my phenomenological gaze, decentring me, dispossessing me of
the world and reducing me to one more for whom this thing in its beauty is the world's
centre.
What has happened in this decentring is that the thing expresses itself as a self. This is
what is at play in all the transcendentals, namely the selving of the thing. Gerald Manley
Hopkins speaks poetically of this selving when he states: "Each mortal thing does one
thing and the same: / Deals out that being indoors each one dwells; / Selves - goes
itself; myself it speaks and spells".31 Each thing, in other words, in appearing shows
itself (as a card dealer shows the cards) but as that which dwells within itself. In
showing itself it appears as an expression of itself. To catch its appearance is to be
drawn into the thing's relation to itself and the world in which I as the perceiver am
but one perspective. But what I see in the thing is not simply an object but a promise;
indeed, in Hopkins' terms, what is expressed is the thing as a vocation: "Crying What I
do is me: for that I came". In each thing is a promise of a fulfilment, an anticipation of
that which is to come, the appearing thing as a self, the appearing of its inner self.
The transcendentals are originary moments, moments out of which meaning can be
instituted and moments which promise a fulfilment. They are utopian moments,
28 Kant, Religion within the Bounds of mere Reason, 53-54.
29 Kierkegaard, Fear and Trembling, 83-95 on the "teleologiocal suspension of the ethical".
30 Stendhal, De l'amour, 64-65.
31 Hopkins, 'Poem 57', The Poems of Gerald Manley Hopkins, 90.
THE JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
109

moments of no place and of a time which is no present time, but that time without which
there would be no present. The question we are then faced with is what that time is and
who we are who stand in it.
3. Time and Emotion
If perception is of things in their promise, then perception is both passion and empathy.
Being, oneness, truth, goodness, beauty are not categories or value judgements on the
thing, but rather the modes of appearing of a thing in relation to a perceiving linguistic
being. That relation is one of attention (attraction/repulsion) tending towards null
when the perceiving being is inattentive or indifferent. In other words, the transcendentals
indicate modes of being moved by things. I am moved at a most basic level to attend to a
thing, to stretch towards it. I am stretching towards that thing which appears to me as a
promise, as an anticipation. What I attend to is the thing as it "selves", as it (partially)
shows its indoor being to me. It is this which the artist expresses by saying that it is as
if the object is looking at me.32 In literal sense this is not true, but it is also not simply
a figurative anthropocentric fancy. The thing in appearing expresses itself and that
expression requires my empathy, i.e. my capacity to perceive the object as expression.
Again, such an emphasis of empathy seems misplaced: surely my empathy can only be
for a being which feels as I do? But not only is the assumption of a necessary prior feeling
in me based in an analogical theory which fails to account for genuine self-transcendence
in empathy,33 it also imposes a particular learned experience of empathy as universally
given. On the contrary, Scheler argued for the presence of a kind of universal grammar
of expression34 which we gradually become less sensitive to due to a process of de-anima-
tion: "a continuous process of disenchantment, in that only a proportion of sensory
appearances retain their function as vehicles of expression".35 While clearly empathy
seems easier the more like us the other being is, this is contingent on other factors
which are not essential to empathy itself. Empathy in such a view is the perceiving of
the other being as expressive of itself. The painter painting a still life is trying to
capture that self-expression, that being of the apple in it twofold movement of selfhood.
The self-expression of the thing again does not arise out of conscious agency, but rather
comes from the duality of the thing itself. A thing as an object of perception is dual in the
sense of facing towards and away from the perceiving self. What I see is the object facing
me, but that which faces me gives expression to a movement away from me, a movement
which is not the contrary of its outward movement but rather constitutive of it. In facing
me the thing turns away from me and in so doing expresses for me its way of being in the
world as a manifestation of being, oneness, truth, goodness and beauty. Its intentional
being is nothing other than that manifestation, which happens for me in that space
between us. In expressing itself in this way, it expresses being, oneness, truth, goodness
and beauty in the singular manner of its own being. What I perceive there exceeds any
literal description I can give. The intentional being of the thing gathers together its own
sense as an expression of its relational being, that is, as an expression of the worldliness
32 On this see Merleau-Ponty, 'Eye and Mind', 299.
33 Zahavi, Self and Other, 119.
34 Scheler, The Nature of Sympathy, 11.
35 Ibid., 238.
110
F. Ó MURCHADHA

of its appearance. This worldliness cannot be reduced to the thing itself, or to my percep-
tion of it, but rather to the thing as it relates to all around it including to me who perceives
it. My perception is essential to its appearing, but contingently so: the thing could have
appeared without me and only accidentally does it appear to me. The utter contingency
of this appearance is falsified once we begin to give a causal account of its appearance,
as such an account will always function retrospectively - as Bergson would say, through
a retrograde movement36 - through a later reconstruction of the coming to appearance.
Such an account is not false, but it falsifies the contingency of this manifestation of the
plurality of its faces of being without which it would not be. The seeking of grounds
comes too late to capture this contingent event; the contingency is that which I experience
in faith. However, this faith is not discrete, but rather a being-affected by the thing in its
worldiness. Such being-affected is the atmosphere of being that the thing manifests for me.
A tree standing isolated in a field, leafless, bare and dark against the grey winter sky,
appears to me melancholically, a face of decay and death. The tree appears to me as mel-
ancholic in appearing to me as bare and leafless. The tree we suppose cannot experience
melancholy and in perceiving it that way I may be said to be projecting my sense of mel-
ancholy onto it. However, we can no more suppose that the tree experiences itself as leaf-
less than as melancholic, but it appears to me as both leafless and melancholic. I, in turn,
can know the tree is leaf-less without having to have experienced leaflessness myself. I
experience things both animate and inanimate as showing me better than any feeling of
my own what an emotion can be. Only when we begin with an actual subject, immediate
first to itself and then extending perceptually and actively into the external world, do we
conclude that emotions are first felt auto-affectively and then projected onto objects. Once
we begin with the thing as it moves me to encounter it in the openness of that transcen-
dental field which opens between us can we see that the thing appears to us in the passion
of being through which we are swept up in the world in a desire which works first on the
instinctive core of our being.
Many implications derive from this, but here we can only explore the temporality or
rather the temporal ontology of such an account. When I perceive the thing as a self, I
perceive it in the temporality of its being. In so doing I perceive the thing in its past
which was never present to me and its to come which will never be mine. But by the
same token I recognize that this past and present of the thing was never its own either.
The self-expression of the thing is its "selving", that is its coming to manifest a singular
being, oneness, truth, goodness and beauty. But this selving is itself a temporary delinea-
tion, a contingent being set in play as a self which can never be its own origin or ends but
rather is in relation to that from which its origins and ends arise. How to understand this
"from which" is the ultimate metaphysical question. Phenomenologically it has to remain
undecidable because any decision will replace the original phenomena of experience with
constructs or with the privileging of particular revelations. However, this is not to say that
the diverse traditions from which these "answers" emerge cannot prove fruitful for phe-
nomenological discussion and reflection. The selving of a thing is its coming to relation
to itself in respect not only of what is not itself (others, the world) but also that which
it cannot fully incorporate in itself, its origins and ends. Phenomenologically we have to
ask where (if anywhere) this coming to be a self comes to appearance in its origins. To
36 Bergson, The Creative Mind, 11.
THE JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
111

respond to this, we can turn to the experience of self-aware beings in their coming to be
and we can discuss this from the first-person perspective.
To be is to suffer being. I cannot give myself being, my being is given to me and the
same is true of those various expressions of this being in its appearing (oneness, truth,
goodness and beauty). To suffer being is not to be without responsibility for being; on
the contrary, the burden of being is that I am responsible for that which I did not do.
My responsibility for that which I did not do has at its source the recognition that the
coming to be is not simply something I am passive against, but that which belongs to
no one. There is no one and nothing at my coming to be because the singular coming
to be is not someone else's, so cannot be claimed by someone else and is not mine, so
cannot be claimed by me. The myth of Pygmalion demonstrates this situation: Pygmalion
loves his creation and seeks its ultimate fulfilment in life. This desire is for his creation to
be both his and not his, the result of his skills and labour but a being other than and distant
from him. In this desire is the recognition that there is a moment when that which is made
becomes itself and that moment is one which belongs neither to the artist nor to his cre-
ation, but dwells in a third instance, a third time and space which can never be present,
cannot be perceived or conceptualized, but which nonetheless impresses itself upon the
self as its very origin. That third time and space has no selfhood, no identity, is no sub-
stance, but is rather that which - working backwards in the history of philosophy -
Merleau-Ponty tries to articulate with his account of flesh, Husserl with the thought of
horizon, Aristotle in his supposition of prime matter and Plato with three peculiar
names: apeiron, chora and exaiphnes. Plato speaks of "this queer thing" "the instant
(exaiphnes)", a moment in which "the one changes from being to ceasing to be or from
not being to coming to be".37 Aristotle speaks of (prime) matter as "not in itself a some-
thing ... not a quantity nor said to be any of the other things by which that which is is
defined".38 Husserl in his account of the horizon recognizes the being of porosity, a
fulcrum through which the thing comes infinitely to be itself,39 while Merleau-Ponty
speaks of the flesh in saying that "it eclipses itself at the moment of producing itself, is
always of the two things the one".40 Such two things, such porosity, such a moment
between two states, brings us to the limits of thought, but it can be painted and sculpted
- this is the crucial insight which Merleau-Ponty has relating to painting and sculpture -
an image that portrays the body in a gesture across space and time, introducing what
Donald Landes terms "fictive linkages" from which "transition and duration spring
forth from the canvas or bronze".41
Being moved to be towards a thing is to be shown that thing in the promise of its being.
That means that the self must give itself over to the time of the thing in the how of its
appearing. That how of appearing is an event, is the becoming outer of the inner and
the becoming inner of the outer. Appearance is in this sense transformation. The appear-
ing of the thing is its making manifest of being, oneness, truth, goodness and beauty and
37 Plato, Parmenides, 156d.
38 Aristotle, Metaphysics, Zeta, iii, 1029a20-21. The question of "prime matter" is of course a controversial one in Aristotle
scholarship. In this context what is significant is that Aristotle understands such matter as that which can be posited even
though it stands outside the intelligible context of his account (as can be seen in the manner in which following this
passage he denies that matter so understood can be counted as substance).
39 Husserl, Ideas II, 299
40 Merleau-Ponty, The Visible and the Invisible, 191.
41 Landes, Merleau-Ponty and the Paradoxes of Expression, 160.
112
F. Ó MURCHADHA

doing so in that between space in which it appears to me. That between space is a middle
which logic tries to exclude, a both/and which is neither/nor. That middle space in the
space of transformation where the thing becomes a self for itself and for others. What phe-
nomenology tells us is precisely not that the thing is only in its correlation with my con-
sciousness, but rather that the thing comes to be for my consciousness always in the
moment of its transformation to being, oneness, truth, goodness and beauty. That
which Merleau-Ponty captures in his account of the moment of reversibility is that
which saves thought from contradiction, for thinking the contraries at once; it is a
moment which escapes both perception and conceptuality. Merleau-Ponty speaks of
"this unique possible which our world is, is not, in its fabric, made of actuality".42 In
seeking this moment, between inner and outer, phenomenology is on the way to redisco-
vering the question which animated the later Plato, that of finding that third thing which
can be grasped neither by reason nor by sense, but rather is glimpsed in a dream-like
thought which sees in the between of being and becoming, of rest and motion, of inner
and outer that movement of expression in which there is sense.
4. Conclusion
The pronouncement of the death of phenomenology has accompanied it since its inception
in the work of Husserl and the newest manifestation of this can be found in the so-called
"speculative realists".43 This is not the place to address the arguments marshalled in differ-
ent ways within that realist turn. The fundamental issue, however, concerns the justification
of transcendental philosophy and this it seems to me is a question which does not revolve
around issues of idealism and realism, but rather as to the place of philosophical reflection,
where it begins, how it deals with its objects and what it aims towards. Against those who
wish to decry any philosophy of access44 as a victim of correlationist prejudice45 denying
to objects their proper place and reality,46 I have tried to show that a philosophy of
access recognizes itself as coming too late, the correlation of perceiving self and thing self
is not a pernicious anthropocentrism but rather an openness onto a transcendental field
of emphatic passion and that in that field is disclosed a third instance out of which all
selves emerge into phenomenal reality. This is so because the thing in appearing as a self
in the world appears as that which transcends itself. Such self-transcendence is not peculiar
to Dasein or the knowing subject, but rather is essential to appearance as the self of that
which appears. The appearing of a thing is the appearing of that which draws the self
into communication with it and shows the self what it means to be.
Phenomenology thinks and speaks from and of the passion of being. Before we can
speak of the activity of a knowing or acting subject we need to think the passivity of
the self in its being drawn out by the world. The world draws out the self through the
allure of the phenomenal being of things. These speak affectively to the self's desires
and emotions. The affective appearance of things is not - when investigated
42 Merleau-Ponty, The Visible and the Invisible, 277.
43 See Bryant, Srnicek, and Harman (eds.), The Speculative Turn.
44 Sparrow, The End of Phenomenology, 114-45.
45 Meillassoux, After Finitude, 5.
46 Harman, 'Object-Oriented Philosophy' in Towards Speculative Realism, 93-104; Harmann, Tool-Being, 224-35.
THE JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
113

phenomenologically - a subsequent projection onto the thing, but rather the way in which
things communicate their being, oneness, truth, goodness and beauty.
What emerges from these reflections is an account of reason not as a capacity of the
rational subject somehow divorced from his affective being but rather of the self as
driven by the desire of reason: reason's desire and rational desire. Far from being
beyond or above the passion of being, through reason we see most clearly that in the
being of things which inspires desire in us, namely the dual aspect of the thing as appear-
ing and hiding itself, showing the self to itself in its lack and excess. The desire of reason
finds itself in the continual striving to overcome this duality, to see things in the full trans-
parency of their being. In the face of this unhappy place of human reason there are two
possible trajectories of response: that which sees human reason as destined to overcome
its limitation on the model of some form of divine reason, or to see reason as a peculiarly
human striving to be in community with other things, a striving which will always be
limited by the alterity of the other. Phenomenology is Kantian to the extent to which -
in all its different manifestation - it remains committed to the latter course.
The thing directs me to the transcendental constitution of its being which is radically
contingent on the historicity of my being in community with it. My being towards things is
a commitment to such a community. This depends on the factual presence of a world
towards which I can open myself in hope and love. Not only is the presence of such a
world not at all guaranteed, neither is its continuance. Dependent on hope and love, phe-
nomenology understands the philosophical self as continually faced with the possibility of
despair. The world is a fragile place; trust in the world can be dangerous. Indeed, to under-
stand philosophy from the passion of being is to understand it as risking all for the sake of
things and world. To risk all in this way is perhaps foolhardy, it is at any rate certainly an
adventure of thought and of speaking. The adventurous, as Simmel tells us, is letting our-
selves experience that what we normally trust to our own powers and capacities comes
about only through a "mysterious efficacy [of our capacity] together with the powers of
fate".47 This adventure finds the self with that which already is and directed towards a
promise which is never fully fulfilled, but which shows the human being at the very
heart of her experience, her reason and her faith that the temporality of things and the
world is one which she can know only in the manner in which she comes up against
the limits of her own capacities. In that sense finally all thought and speaking is a form
of prayer, albeit a prayer towards that which remains without a name, but which is
encountered in being, oneness, truth, goodness and beauty.
ORCID
Felix Ó Murchadha
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7764-3552
References
Aertsen, J. Medieval Philosophy and the Transcendentals. Leiden: Brill, 1996.
Al-Saji, Alia. 'When Thinking Hesitates: Philosophy as Prosthesis and Transformative Vision'.
Southern Journal of Philosophy 50, no. 2 (2012): 351-61.
Aristotle. The Metaphysics. Trans. H. Lawson-Trancred. London: Penguin, 1998.
47 Simmel, 'Das Abenteuer', 184.
114
F. Ó MURCHADHA

Bergson, H. The Creative Mind: An Introduction to Metaphysics. Trans. M.L. Andinson. New York:
Greenwood Press, 1968.
Bergson, H. Matter and Memory. Trans. N.M. Paul and W.S. Palmer. London: Zone Books, 1990.
Bryant, L. R., N. Srnicek, and G. Harman, eds. The Speculative Turn: Continental Materialism and
Realism. Melbourne: Re press, 2011.
Chretien, J-L. The Ark of Speech. Trans. A. Brown. London: Routledge, 2004.
Eckhart, Meister. 'Prologue to the Opus tripartium', in Lateinische Werke I. Stuttgart: Kohlhammer,
1956.
Harman, G. Tool-Being: Heidegger and the Metaphysics of Objects. Peru, IL: Open Court, 2002.
Harman, G. Towards Speculative Realism: Essays and Lectures. London: Zero Books, 2010.
Heidegger, M. 'The Thing'. In Poetry, Language, Thought. Trans. A. Hofstadter. London: Harper
and Row, 2001, 161-84.
Heidegger, M. 'On the Essence of Truth'. In Pathmarks, ed. W. McNeill. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2010.
Heidegger,
M.
Being
and
Time:
A
Revised
Edition
of
the
Stambaugh
Translation.
Trans. J. Stambaugh and Ed. D. Schmidt. Albany: SUNY Press, 2012.
Hopkins, G.M. The Poems of Gerald Manley Hopkins. Ed. R. Bridges. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1970.
Husserl, E. Erste Philosophie. Husserliana Bd 7. Ed. R. Boehm. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1956.
Husserl, E. Grenzprobleme der Phänomenologie. Husserliana 42. R. Sowa & T. Vongeher. New York:
Springer, 2014.
Kant, I. Religion within the Bounds of mere Reason. Trans. and Ed. A. Wood and G. di Giovanni.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998.
Kierkegaard, S. Fear and Trembling. Trans. A. Hannay. London: Penguin, 1986.
Landes, D. Merleau-Ponty and the Paradoxes of Expression. London: Bloomsbury, 2013.
Meillassoux, Q. After Finitude. Trans. R. Brassier. London: Bloomsbury, 2009.
Merleau-Ponty, M. The Visible and the Invisible. Trans. A. Lingis. Evanston: Northwestern
University Press, 1969.
Merleau-Ponty, M. 'Eye and Mind'. In Merleau-Ponty: Basic Writings, ed. T. Baldwin, 290-324.
London: Routledge, 2003.
Merleau-Ponty, M. Phenomenology of Perception. Trans. D. Landes. London: Routledge, 2013.
Ó Murchadha, F. A Phenomenology of Christian Life. Bloomington: Indiana UP, 2013.
Ó Murchadha, F. 'Love's Conditions: Passion and the Practice of Philosophy'. In Thinking about
Love: Essays in Contemporary Continental Philosophy, eds. D. Enns and A. Calcagno, 63-80.
University Park: Penn State University Press, 2015.
Otto, R. The Idea of the Holy. Trans. J. Harvey. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1950.
Plato. Parmenides. Trans. M.L. Gill. London: Hackett, 1996.
Romano, C. Au coeur de la raison, la phénoménologie. Paris: Gallimard, 2010.
Sartre, J.P. Being and Nothingness. H. Barnes. London: Routledge, 1969.
Scheler, M. The Nature of Sympathy. Trans. P. Heath. Piscataway, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 2018.
Simmel. 'Das Abenteuer'. In Hauptprobleme der Philosophie. Philosophische Kultur. Frankfurt:
Suhrkamp, 1996.
Sparrow, T. The End of Phenomenology Metaphysics and the New Realism. Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press, 2014.
Stendhal. De l'amour. Paris: Garnier-Flammarion, 1965.
Stone, C.D. Should Trees have Standing?. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010.
Wohleben, P. The Hidden Life of Trees What They Feel, How They Communicate: Discoveries from a
Secret World. Trans. J. Billinghurst. Vancouver: Greystone Books, 2016.
Zahavi, D. Self and Other. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014.
New Jerusalem Bible. London: Darton, Longman & Todd Ltd, 1994.
THE JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
115

