Indo-Paciﬁc Journal of Phenomenology
ISSN: 2079-7222 (Print) 1445-7377 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/ripj20
Phenomenology Without Correlationism:
Husserl's Hyletic Material
Patrick Whitehead
To cite this article: Patrick Whitehead (2015) Phenomenology Without Correlationism:
Husserl's Hyletic Material, Indo-Paciﬁc Journal of Phenomenology, 15:2, 1-12, DOI:
10.1080/20797222.2015.1101830
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/20797222.2015.1101830
© 2015 The Author(s).
Published online: 26 Oct 2015.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 1471
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ripj20

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology  
 Volume 15, Edition 2  
October 2015 
 
        Page 1 of 12 
ISSN (online) : 1445-7377 
 
                  ISSN (print) : 2079-7222 
 
 
© The Author(s). This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0]. 
The IPJP is published in association with NISC (Pty) Ltd and Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
www.ipjp.org 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/20797222.2015.1101830 
 
 
 
Phenomenology Without Correlationism: 
Husserl's Hyletic Material 
 
by Patrick Whitehead 
 
 
Abstract 
 
The thrust of the argument presented in this paper is that phenomenological ontology survives the 
criticism of "correlationism" as advanced by speculative realism, a movement that has evolved in 
continental philosophy over the past decade. Correlationism is the position, allegedly occupied by 
phenomenology, that presupposes the ontological primacy of the human subject. Phenomenology 
survives this criticism not because the criticism misses its mark, but because phenomenology 
occupies a position that is broader than that of correlationism. With its critique of correlationism, 
speculative realism rightly identifies a battle that no longer needs to be fought: the battle against 
19th century brands of mechanical realism. Free from the impatient and defensive posturing 
against the mechanization of the human, phenomenology is also free to explore the world beyond 
its emphasis on human experience. Doing so requires a return to Husserl's discussion of hylé and 
the "twofold bed" of phenomenology. Phenomenology may emphasize hylé - that is, material; or 
it may emphasize nous - the world as it appears to or is transformed by consciousness. By 
returning to Merleau-Ponty's Phenomenology of Perception, a case is made for hyletic 
phenomenology. Hyletic phenomenology allows for ontological reversibility and recognizes the 
"unhuman" elements in things. It is hyletic phenomenology that grounds phenomenological 
ontology after the critique of correlationism has been assessed. 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
This paper sets out to establish three aims. The first is 
to summarise the implications of the criticism that 
phenomenology is correlationist - a criticism issuing 
from the recently developed continental school of 
speculative realism. Correlationism is the argument 
that subject and object collapse into a human-subject-
correlate. This criticism is troubling, because it 
suggests that phenomenology has little to offer the 
continually evolving critical and socio-cultural 
studies and humanities. In focus at present is 
phenomenological ontology, and specifically the 
inter/relationship between subject and object. The 
second aim is to demonstrate that the critique of 
correlationism is not new to phenomenology. Indeed, 
the ontological limitations implied by correlationism 
have been considered by Husserl (1913/2002), 
Heidegger (1936-38/2012), and Merleau-Ponty (1945/ 
1962, 1964/1968), and most impressively so in 
Merleau-Ponty's lecture notes on Nature (1956-60/ 
2003). Finally, I outline a phenomenological ontology 
that takes into consideration the criticism levelled by 
speculative realism. However, rather than arguing that 
phenomenological ontology must undergo a radical 
transformation in order to satisfy the recent demands 
of continental philosophy, I maintain that all that is 
required is a broadening of emphasis. This is to say 
that speculative realism has rightly identified that the 
continued emphasis on the human subject - an 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology  
Volume 15, Edition 2  
 October 2015 
 
Page 2 of 12 
 
 
© The Author(s). This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0]. 
The IPJP is published in association with NISC (Pty) Ltd and Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
www.ipjp.org 
emphasis that was particularly important in response 
to the psychologism of the early 20th century - is no 
longer necessary. Husserl (1913/2002) has outlined a 
twofold task for phenomenology - hyletic and noetic 
phenomenology (pp. 174-178). Finally, Merleau-
Ponty will play a pivotal role in negotiating the 
tension between phenomenology and speculative 
realism. This is because he is both the target of the 
criticisms familiar to speculative realism such as 
anthropocentrism and dualism (Barbaras, 1991/2004; 
Merleau-Ponty, 1964/1968) as well as an example of 
their solution (Harman, 2005). 
  
Phenomenological Ontology after 19th Century 
Realism 
 
Phenomenology developed at a time when it had 
become customary to reduce the world to its smallest 
parts - parts that operate by the predictable rules of 
mechanical physics. This was most apparent in the 
humanistic sciences of medical biology (e.g., 
Goldstein, 1934/1995) and psychology (e.g., Köhler, 
1929/1947). Both of these received attention from 
Husserl (1913/2002, 1936/1970) and Merleau-Ponty 
(1942/1963, 1945/1962). Evidence gathered both 
inside and outside the laboratory has demonstrated 
repeatedly that a mechanistic ontology is insufficient 
for understanding the operations, behaviour and 
experience of humans. But this critique was never 
limited to the humanistic sciences. The untenability of 
19th century mechanical realism has been demon-
strated in physics, chemistry, biology, botany, and 
other fields (see Cobb & Griffin, 1977, for an 
impressive summary of many of these). To say that 
phenomenology had developed only in response to 
mechanical realism is to suggest that phenomenology 
has nothing to offer beyond its criticism of, and its 
proposed alternative to, the 19th century brand of 
realism. This is important to understand in the context 
of speculative realism, because its critique begins 
with the observation that science and philosophy are 
no longer compelled by 19th century realism, and 
thus no longer need to be defended against it. For 
example, Harman (2002/2006) explains that "[b]y 
nervously avoiding all mention of specific entities, 
[phenomenology] continues to lose sleep over an 
enemy that has not existed for seventy years" (p. 28). 
To be sure, phenomenological ontology has indeed 
emphasized its anti-realist position, but I argue that 
this does not necessarily typify phenomenological 
ontology. Indeed, speculative realism has done well 
to demonstrate that the issues originally faced by 
phenomenology, although important seven decades 
ago, are no longer a threat. While there is certainly 
work left unfinished in the fields of psychology and 
medicine, the dogma of 19th century realism is hardly 
the bogeyman it once was. Phenomenology may now 
de-emphasize its position against the dehumanizing 
mechanization of the human; this leaves it available 
to emphasize additional nuances of its ontology - like 
the mutual role played by subject and object in the 
phenomenologicalization of contemporary physics 
(Rosen, 2008). 
 
In order to understand how phenomenological 
ontology might shift its emphasis in response to 
speculative realism, the implications of the latter's 
critique that phenomenology is correlationist must 
first be clarified. Since correlationists maintain that 
phenomena may only be understood through the 
correlate of human consciousness, a few examples 
from phenomenology have been selected that demon-
strate this. As mentioned above, Merleau-Ponty has 
been useful in understanding this criticism and in 
finding examples, because he has struggled against 
the emphasis on human consciousness in his own 
work. Merleau-Ponty's own apparent dissatisfaction 
with Phenomenology of Perception despite, I argue 
that this seminal work is every bit as exciting as The 
Visible and the Invisible. Indeed, I will use the former 
to fashion a phenomenological ontology that aptly 
follows the speculative realist critique of correlation-
ism. But first, the criticism that phenomenology is 
correlationist needs to be addressed. 
 
Phenomenology and the Dogma of Correlationism 
 
Husserl, along with the phenomenological tradition 
that would follow, makes great strides in developing 
and defending a metaphysics that negotiates the rift of 
incommensurability between pure idealism and pure 
realism. The proposal is for a rigorous method that 
does not begin with the presupposition of the positive 
universe (or the natural attitude), and that simulta-
neously avoids falling into speculative metaphysics. 
Harman (2011) explains how this position, occupied 
by phenomenology, is necessarily correlationist: 
  
Authors working in the continental tradition 
have generally claimed to stand beyond the 
traditional dispute between realism ("reality 
exists outside our mind") and idealism ("reality 
exists only in the mind"). The correlationist 
alternative, so dominant that it is often left 
unstated by its adherents, is to assume that 
we can think neither of human without world 
nor of world without human, but only of a 
primordial correlation or rapport between the 
two. (p. 2) 
 
Following Brentano's (1874/2002) resurrection of the 
mediaeval notion of intentionality, Husserl defends a 
consciousness that comprises intending subject and 
intentional object as constituents in the intentional 
event. To be sure, the duality of subject and object 
collapse into a singularity, but the problematic 
assumption is that this emergent singularity is limited 
to, and located within, the human. The world and the 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology  
Volume 15, Edition 2  
 October 2015 
 
Page 3 of 12 
 
 
© The Author(s). This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0]. 
The IPJP is published in association with NISC (Pty) Ltd and Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
www.ipjp.org 
subject are fused such that, as Harman has stated, "we 
can think neither of human without world nor of 
world without human". The term "correlation" was 
introduced by Quentin Meillassoux (2003/2012), who 
explains its inference as follows: 
 
By "correlation" we mean the idea according 
to which we only ever have access to the 
correlation between thinking and being, and 
never to either term considered apart from 
the other. ... Consequently, it becomes 
possible to say that every philosophy which 
disavows naïve realism has become a variant 
of correlationism. (p. 5) 
 
Husserl's defence of a transcendental phenomeno-
logical methodology begins with such a rejection of 
naïve realism. This is evident in the The Crisis of 
European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology 
(1936/1970), and it has also been used as a measure 
of one's commitment to the project of phenomeno-
logy. Indeed, Dillon (1988/1998, pp. 69-77) has even 
criticized Husserl for his failure to reject naïve realism 
completely in his analysis of the consequences that 
follow from the rejection of the constancy hypothesis. 
Correlationism rejects the ontological privileging of 
objectivity that naïve realism suggests. But it does so, 
purportedly, without reversing the ontological privi-
lege. Meillassoux continues: 
 
Correlationism consists in disqualifying the 
claim that it is possible to consider the realms 
of subjectivity and objectivity independently 
of one another. Not only does it become 
necessary to insist that we never grasp an 
object "in itself", in isolation from its relation 
to the subject, but it also becomes necessary 
to maintain that we can never grasp a subject 
that would not always-already be related to 
an object. (p. 5) 
 
Harman (2011) explains the correlationist position 
further: 
 
Whereas realists assert the existence of a 
world independent of human thought and 
idealists deny such an autonomous world, 
correlationism adopts an apparently sophisti-
cated intermediate position, in which human 
and world come only as a pair and cannot be 
addressed outside their mutual correlation. 
Accordingly, the dispute between realism and 
idealism is dismissed as a "pseudo-problem". 
Inspired ultimately by Immanuel Kant, 
correlationists are devoted to the human-
world correlate as the sole topic of 
philosophy, and this has become the 
unspoken central dogma of all continental 
and much analytic philosophy. (p. vii) 
Given the apparent integration of the two categories - 
subject and object, mind and body, ideal and real - 
the position of correlationism is often taken as a 
positionless position. The benefits of each position of 
the categorical dualities listed above are preserved by 
binding them together into a unified whole. 
Moreover, this solution seems to have typified much 
of continental thought. Whether the glue that binds 
the dualisms be consciousness (as per continental 
philosophy) or language (as per analytic philosophy), 
the result is the same: an indivisible human link 
between the real and the ideal. Harman explains the 
genesis of the term and its subsequent reception: 
 
The rapid adoption of this word, to the point 
that an intellectual movement has already 
assembled to combat the menace it describes, 
suggests that "correlationism" describes a 
pre-existent reality that was badly in need of 
a name. Whenever disputes arise in philo-
sophy concerning realism and idealism, we 
immediately see the appearance of a third 
personage who dismisses both of these 
alternatives as solutions to a pseudo-problem. 
This third figure is the correlationist, who 
holds that we can never think of the world 
without humans nor of humans without the 
world, but only of a primal correlation or 
rapport between the two. (2011, pp. 7-8) 
 
In his introduction of the term, Meillassoux (2003/ 
2012) identifies the continuing trend in contemporary 
philosophical circles - namely those continental 
strands that begin with consciousness - to grant 
absolute ontological primacy to intentional (human) 
consciousness. While the human certainly provides a 
nexus through which these dualities might collide, the 
correlationists have ended their investigation with the 
human as the only possible nexus. This has resulted in 
dogmatic humanism. 
 
The problem with the continued emphasis on the 
human-correlate of knowledge is that it is incapable 
of understanding and investigating the non-human 
boundaries of experience. The rapid proliferation of 
posthuman studies (e.g. Braidotti, 2013; Wolfe, 2012) 
demonstrates a desire to move past the anthropo-
centric discourses that were so important to the 
middle of the century past. Mechanomorphism is no 
longer the threat, but perhaps anthropocentrism is. If 
understood as an exclusively correlationist position, 
phenomenology has little to offer the continuously 
evolving social and cultural studies. I maintain that 
phenomenological ontology may continue to inform 
philosophy beyond correlationism. This will be 
demonstrated by returning to Merleau-Ponty's (1945/ 
1962) description of the relationship between subject 
and object. More specifically, it will be in consider-
ation of subjects and objects as entities that are 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology  
Volume 15, Edition 2  
 October 2015 
 
Page 4 of 12 
 
 
© The Author(s). This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0]. 
The IPJP is published in association with NISC (Pty) Ltd and Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
www.ipjp.org 
antecedent to the event of (human) experience - 
namely, pre-subjective and pre-objective (referred to 
presently as hylé).  
 
My reason for choosing the Phenomenology of 
Perception to accomplish this task is twofold. Firstly, 
and most importantly, Merleau-Ponty carefully 
describes a phenomenological ontology that is not 
exclusively correlationist (although the latter is still a 
component). Secondly, Merleau-Ponty later accuses 
this text of over-emphasizing consciousness as the 
starting point of phenomenology (1964/1968; 1956-
60/2003). By choosing the text that Merleau-Ponty 
later concludes is correlationist, the present analysis 
avoids the conclusion that phenomenological onto-
logy after speculative realism requires a fundamental 
transformation (into, for example, an ontology of 
flesh). In this way, the present paper may maintain 
the argument that phenomenology is not integrally 
correlationist, but that the latter was a useful 
component for the practice of phenomenology in the 
century past. 
 
At this juncture, I will briefly address Merleau-Ponty's 
concerns that his Phenomenology of Perception is 
correlationist. This will assist in more specifically 
describing the problem of correlationism as it 
emerges in phenomenology. This will be followed by 
an argument in favour of a phenomenological onto-
logy, supplied by Phenomenology of Perception, that 
does not require a correlationist bent. 
 
Merleau-Ponty's Criticism of Phenomenology of 
Perception: Dualism and Anthropocentrism 
  
While Dillon (1988/1998) has found Merleau-Ponty's 
ontological project to succeed in navigating the traps 
of objectivism and subjectivism, it has only done so at 
the cost of correlationism. Take, for instance, Jean 
Beaufret's response (quoted in Merleau-Ponty, 1947/ 
1964) after Merleau-Ponty's presentation of "The 
Primacy of Perception" to the Société Francaise de 
Philosophie in 1946 (Barbaras, 1991/2004): 
 
Nothing appears to me less pernicious than 
the Phenomenology of Perception. The only 
reproach I would make to the author is not 
that he has gone "too far", but rather that he 
has not been sufficiently radical. The 
phenomenological descriptions which he uses 
in fact maintain the vocabulary of idealism. 
In this they are in accord with Husserlian 
descriptions. But the whole problem is 
precisely to know whether phenomenology, 
fully developed, does not require the 
abandonment of subjectivity and the voca-
bulary of subjective idealism as, beginning 
with Husserl, Heidegger has done. (pp. 41-
42) 
Beaufret finds in Phenomenology of Perception what 
Merleau-Ponty (1956-60/2003) later calls "the 
humanist conception of Nature". Indeed, this is what 
Merleau-Ponty (1964/1968) himself has observed in 
reflection upon his own work. With regard to  
Phenomenology of Perception, he writes: 
 
The problems posed in [Phenomenology of 
Perception] are insoluble because I start there 
from the  "consciousness"-"object" distinction - -  
 
Starting from this distinction, one will never 
understand that a given fact of the 
"objective" order (a given cerebral lesion) 
could entail a given disturbance of the 
relation with the world ... which seems to 
prove that the whole "consciousness" is a 
function of the objective body - - it  is these 
very problems that must be disqualified by 
asking: what is the alleged objective 
conditioning? Answer: it is a way of 
expressing and noting an event of the order 
of brute or wild being which, ontologically, 
is primary. (p. 200) 
 
Motivated by Merleau-Ponty's despairing notes, 
Barbaras (1991/2004) explains how Phenomenology 
of Perception remains trapped within a Cartesian 
framework. The only solution, therefore, to Cartesian 
dualism is a correlationist position. Barbaras is 
careful to observe the critique by which Merleau-
Ponty has regarded his own work: beginning with 
consciousness as the starting point. In doing so, a gap 
of temporal duration and ontological ether separates 
things and their being. From this starting point, either 
subjectivity or objectivity must be given ontological 
privilege. Merleau-Ponty, Barbaras writes, 
 
still remains prisoner of a philosophy of 
consciousness inherited from Husserl. This 
appears clearly in the final analysis of the 
body in terms of sensing and sensed, 
touching and touched, subject of the world 
and part of the world. Such conceptual pairs 
are just so many displaced modalities of the 
duality of consciousness and object. The 
chiasm, then, appears as a means of filling 
the gap [écart] between these dual categories, 
of recombining what was split apart before-
hand, rather than as a truly innovative 
concept. Thus, I am inclined more and more 
to think of Merleau-Ponty's final philosophy 
as not having fully cast off the presupposi-
tions of the philosophy of consciousness and 
as faltering because of a lack, rather than an 
excess, of radicality. (p. xxiv) 
 
Barbaras (1991/2004) identifies the ways in which 
Phenomenology of Perception and The Structure of 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology  
Volume 15, Edition 2  
 October 2015 
 
Page 5 of 12 
 
 
© The Author(s). This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0]. 
The IPJP is published in association with NISC (Pty) Ltd and Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
www.ipjp.org 
Behaviour remain within a dual structure. Rather than 
escape the subject-object dialectic, Merleau-Ponty 
remains within it. Moreover, ontological privilege is 
always given to the subject. Barbaras continues: 
 
Expressed as early as the introduction to The 
Structure of Behaviour, Merleau-Ponty's 
purpose lies in understanding the relation 
between consciousness and nature. The 
situation of psychology, which attempts to 
conceive this relation, is characterized by the 
juxtaposition of a critical philosophy that 
turns all of nature into an objective unity 
constituted before consciousness and a 
science that places consciousness in nature 
and conceives the relation between them in 
terms of causality. (p. 3) 
 
As Merleau-Ponty has shown (1956-60/2003), the 
humanistic and romantic conceptions of Nature 
succeed in unifying subject-and-object. The problem, 
however, is that the object may only be understood 
through the primacy of the perceiving subject. This is 
the position of correlationism. In Phenomenology of 
Perception, these conceptions receive a body. Thus, 
objects are understood to collapse into the embodied 
subject. The subject-object dialectic becomes a knot 
drawn as tightly as possible - where the two never 
succeed in becoming intertwined as flesh because the 
subject is understood to be most primary. Barbaras 
(1991/2004) explains the dualism evident in the 
conception of embodied subjectivity: 
 
The body ... appears as something divided 
by means of the subject-object opposition; it 
appears as the still mysterious place where 
the subject-object relation is tied together. 
This is why finally the body can be described 
only across the symmetrical exclusion of the 
two terms of the opposition. The body is 
neither the subject nor the object, but the 
mediation of the subject and object. ... 
Merleau-Ponty oscillates therefore between a 
unitary conception of the body and a dualistic 
vision which turns the body into the "means" 
of consciousness. ... in other words, he never 
reaches the point of describing positively the 
fact that the body belongs neither to the 
domain of the object nor to that of the 
subject. Ultimately, Merleau-Ponty's analysis 
assumes here the Cartesian ambiguity to 
which he never stops returning. (pp. 7-8) 
 
Barbaras observes that Merleau-Ponty continually 
stretches this ontological presupposition into spaces 
of radical nonduality, and yet always returns to the 
problematic subject-object relationship. What renders 
it problematic is that it understands that the subject is 
always ontologically prior to the object. 
It is my argument that Phenomenology of Perception 
provides an ontological framework that is capable of 
avoiding a correlationist stance. For, rather than 
understand that objects are always constituted by 
intentional consciousness, one finds in Merleau-
Ponty's (1945/1962) ontology that non-specific 
event-entities 
coalesce 
into 
a 
co-constitutional 
subject-object-relation. It is only by virtue of their 
mutual relationship that subjects and objects become 
differentiated as such. Thus, to grant ontological 
primacy to subject or object ignores the pre-objective 
and pre-subjective (terms that only receive their 
designation retrospectively) entities that were the 
necessary conditions for the subsequent event. 
Husserl (1913/2002) outlines the two-fold task thus 
faced by phenomenology when he writes that "The 
stream of phenomenological being has a twofold bed: 
a material and a noetic" (p. 178). Phenomenological 
ontology after speculative realism investigates both. 
 
Hyletic and Noetic Phenomenologies 
 
In a correlationist phenomenological ontology, an 
object may be understood only as it is in-itself-for-
me. The subject, then, is that for whom the world of 
objects lies in wait. As we have seen, Merleau-Ponty 
(1964/1968) later expresses his disappointment with 
this distinction. But it is important to recognize the 
context in which his position has been established. 
The first section of Phenomenology of Perception is 
committed to moving past the ontic object - that is, 
the positivist object of science. By distinguishing the 
scientific object from the pre-objective object of 
experience, Merleau-Ponty must demonstrate the 
ontological untenability of 19th century realism. He 
does not, however, end with this distinction. Merleau-
Ponty spends more time considering the role played 
by entities before they have been captured by 
subjectivities. In doing so, he begins to describe a 
phenomenological programme for considering non-
human/posthuman subjectivities and objectivities, a 
position found better developed in The Visible and the 
Invisible. Instead of arguing that Merleau-Ponty's 
ontology begins with the primacy of perception, I 
maintain that this is merely a starting point of a 
possible many. The unity of subject and object in 
human perception signifies the actuality of an event 
of human experience, but it must be understood that 
the constituents precede the event's actualization. 
Before becoming differentiated as subject and object 
in the event of experience, the as yet undistinguished 
entities may be understood as Husserl's hylé. 1 As 
hylé, it is recognized that a particular entity has the 
capacity for becoming either an object or a subject - 
                                                 
1 While Whitehead (2014), following Rosen (2008), has 
referred to this ontologically undifferentiated matter as a 
sub-object, for the purposes of historical consistency 
Husserl's hylé has been used in the present paper. 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology  
Volume 15, Edition 2  
 October 2015 
 
Page 6 of 12 
 
 
© The Author(s). This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0]. 
The IPJP is published in association with NISC (Pty) Ltd and Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
www.ipjp.org 
"they might also be entitled formless materials or 
material forms" (1913/2002, p. 175). Hylé refers to 
the status of an as yet undistinguished ontological 
entity: it is ontologically neutral, haunting the events 
of the world as a possible subject or object. An 
explication of Husserl's hylé, in the context of the 
criticism of correlationism, will be the task of this 
final section. Merleau-Ponty (1945/1962) will be 
drawn on for examples. 
 
Hylé 
 
In Ideas, Husserl takes a brief detour to explore the 
ontological boundaries of phenomenology. Here he 
discerns "primary" or "sensory" contents from "the 
experience or phases of experience, which are the 
bearers of the specific quality of intentionality" (p. 
174). These are the fundamental elements of 
phenomenological ontology: sensory contents and 
intentionality. This short list might certainly raise the 
eyebrows of speculative realists, as each item on the 
list seems to suggest the necessity of the human-
correlate. But this is specifically the problem that 
Husserl wishes to address in this passage (pp. 174-
178). To do so, he clarifies the ambiguity in the 
category of "sensory contents". 
 
Husserl explains that the adjective "sensory" 
immediately suggests two meanings, and that this 
ambiguity may prove ontologically problematic. 
Sensory could refer to that which is mediated through 
the "senses" in normal outer perception. This is the 
object before it is intended: a necessary but not 
sufficient condition for intentionality. Sensory might 
also indicate the necessity of a subject who is sense-
bestowing. This limits the object to its availability to 
an intentional subject. "Thus, [in] all events," Husserl 
explains, "we need a new term which shall express 
the whole group through its unity of function and its 
contrast with the formative characters, and we choose 
for this purpose the expression hyletic or material 
data, also plainly and simply materials" (p. 176). 
 
Before moving on, it is important to discern hyletic 
data from psychical objects. This is due to the fact 
that Merleau-Ponty (1942/1962, 1945/1962) is very 
outspoken against the latter. Psychical, Husserl (1913/ 
2002) explains, is too easily confused with "the 
distinctive object of psychology" and must therefore 
be guarded against (p. 177). When introspective 
psychologists such as Titchener identified objects of 
perception, they had in mind an empirical reality 
given in fact. Subjectivity, then, was understood as 
the pure-impression of objective reality. This is a 
position that is ontologically untenable. Such access 
to "[t]he pure impression is", Merleau-Ponty (1945/ 
1962) explains, "not only undiscoverable but also 
imperceptible" (p. 4). The world of perception - of 
psychical objects - does not precede perception or 
cause perception. But this is not the same as Husserl's 
hyletic data. In order for hylé to become psychical 
objects (or objects of perception), they must undergo 
the transformation of intentionality. Thus it would be 
inaccurate and misleading to speak of them as 
particular psychical objects lying in wait for human 
consciousness. As hyletic datum, material provides a 
setting for an intentional event or otherwise. 
 
Hylé includes the sensibility of matter without being 
limited to its availability to human consciousness. 
This avoids the correlationist suggestion that objects 
are necessarily waiting around to be intended by 
humans. Based on the twofold character of sensibility 
just outlined, phenomenology may be understood as a 
twofold project: "The stream of phenomenological 
being has a twofold bed: a material and a noetic" 
(Husserl, 1913/2002, p. 178). Husserl continues - 
"Phenomenological reflexions and analyses which 
specially concern the material may be called 
hyletically phenomenological, as, on the other side, 
those that relate to noetic phases may be referred to as 
noetically phenomenological" (p. 178). Accordingly, 
phenomenologists may explore the noetic world, 
beginning with its presentation to and transformation 
by consciousness. Phenomenology may also begin 
with matter - "which contains in itself nothing 
intentional" (p. 175); it may begin with the object. 
There is nothing in phenomenological ontology that 
prevents the consideration of the object. Husserl does, 
however, share which of the two tasks he finds the 
most rewarding: "the incomparably more important 
and fruitful analyses belong to the noetical side" (p. 
178). Indeed, this is where he spends the bulk of his 
career. In what follows, I will outline a programme of 
hyletic phenomenology with the help of Merleau-Ponty. 
 
Michel Henry (1990/2008) analyzed Husserl's brief 
mention of hyletic phenomenology in an essay of the 
same name; here he shares his frustration at what 
precious little attention (four pages) hyletic material 
has received from Husserl. Hylé, Henry argues, 
provides a point of departure into radically immanent 
phenomenology - one that avoids the presupposed 
reduction to the transcendental (in a manner 
consistent with Spinoza). As such, Merleau-Ponty's 
"paradox of immanence and transcendence" would be 
no paradox at all. This differs from the present 
analysis, where Merleau-Ponty's discussion of the 
uncanny will be consulted in the consideration of 
hyletic phenomenology. 
 
Merleau-Ponty's Event 
 
Concerning the aims of this paper, it is important to 
emphasize the significance of the criticism of 
correlationism that speculative realism has issued 
with regard to phenomenological ontology. This has 
been taken seriously. The continued emphasis on 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology  
Volume 15, Edition 2  
 October 2015 
 
Page 7 of 12 
 
 
© The Author(s). This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0]. 
The IPJP is published in association with NISC (Pty) Ltd and Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
www.ipjp.org 
objects qua intentional-objects, to the neglect of 
objects as entities antecedent to experience, is no 
longer necessary. Continuing to insist upon the 
"onefold bed" of noetic phenomenology is to defend 
against a long-benign threat. By relaxing its defensive 
posturing against naïve realism, additional benefits of 
phenomenological ontology may rise to the fore. That 
is to say that phenomenology may embrace its 
twofold task of hylé and nous. 
 
While Merleau-Ponty's ontology could demonstrate 
noetic phenomenology (see Dillon, 1988/1998), it 
may also be found to demonstrate the being of the 
phenomenon (see Barbaras, 1991/2004) or hyletic 
phenomenology. These do not have to be pitted one 
against the other. Instead, it may be understood that 
Merleau-Ponty's ontology is sufficiently broad in 
escaping the objectification of humans as well as the 
anthropomorphism of things. This is to say that 
Phenomenology of Perception provides an application 
of phenomenological ontology in the domain of 
human experience - but it could have focused 
elsewhere had the social and historical context 
demanded that it do so. This is no more outlandish 
than Harman's (2002/2006) argument that Part II of 
Heidegger's Being and Time could have been used to 
investigate something other than human existence, for 
instance airport tarmac. Here, too, we find it difficult 
to come up with a focus of investigation more salient 
at its time than questions of existence and meaning as 
they were being lived by World War I weary 
Europeans. The argument is that, for Phenomenology 
of Perception as well as for Being and Time, the 
specific application of the method is not ontologically 
binding. So what does Merleau-Ponty (1945/1962) 
tell us about the being of entities before they become 
differentiated as subjects and objects? 
 
In his phenomenological ontology, Merleau-Ponty 
maintains the reciprocal and mutual becoming of 
subjects and objects in what he terms the event: 
 
When an event is considered at close 
quarters, at the moment when it is lived 
through, everything seems subject to 
chance: one man's ambition, some lucky 
encounter, some local circumstance or other 
appears to have been decisive. But chance 
happenings offset each other, and facts in 
their multiplicity coalesce and show up a 
certain way of taking a stand in relation to 
the human situation, reveal in fact an event 
which has its definite outcome and about 
which we can talk. (pp. xviii-xix) 
 
Merleau-Ponty describes the unfolding of an event by 
using the example of human experience. Once again, 
this is not an ontological claim. There is no argument 
that the event of human experience is the only type of 
event that can unfold; it is merely an example, useful 
for understanding what is meant by event. Notice how 
the event marks the conclusion of a particular and 
circumscribed relationship between entities - a 
subject and an object. As soon as an event has 
reached this point, we find an object standing in a 
particular relationship to a subject. This would be a 
reasonable starting point for noetic phenomenology, 
because it is only at this point that an event-
constituent may be differentiated as a human subject. 
But this is not the beginning of the event. If this 
relationship between subject and object formed the 
foundation of phenomenological ontology, then there 
would be a line dividing nature into the categories of 
subject and object, each with a particular role or 
standing in relation to the other. Merleau-Ponty's 
dissatisfaction with this position is particularly 
apparent in The Visible and the Invisible and his 
course notes on Nature, but it may be seen even in 
Phenomenology of Perception. It is only through their 
coalescence in the event that subject-ness and object-
ness may become differentiated as such. This leaves a 
second mode of phenomenological investigation: 
Husserl's hyletic phenomenology. Merleau-Ponty's 
event provides two examples of this. In the first, we 
will see how an entity may be granted subject-status 
only by an object - that is, an object constituting a 
subject, and not necessarily the other way around. 
This is in line with Husserl's reference to the "stratum 
through whose agency ... intentional experience takes 
form and shape" (1913/2002, p. 175). In the second, 
we will see how an entity that remains on the 
periphery of conscious (human) attention may be 
understood to exist without having been kidnapped by 
intentionality - Husserl's "formless materials and 
immaterial forms" (p. 175). These will be explored in 
sequence and with the continued help of Merleau-
Ponty (1945/1962). 
 
Observing the role of the object in constituting the 
subject 
In Phenomenology of Perception, we learn that the 
understanding of subjects and objects need not be 
limited to the significance that the latter holds for the 
former. Indeed, the very opposite could also be the 
case. However, given the long-standing bias toward 
biological reductionism against which Merleau-Ponty 
had been struggling, it is easy to equate any emphasis 
on an object with behaviourism or biological 
reductionism. If the speculative realists are correct, 
and I think that they are, then phenomenologists may 
now acknowledge that particular environmental 
contexts (i.e., objects; see Appelbaum, 1993) or social 
milieux (i.e., subjects; see Levinas, 1961/1969) are 
sufficient for bringing about particular subjectivities. 
Moreover, they may do so without worrying about 
becoming behaviourists who understand subjectivity 
as nothing more than a predictable response to 
environmental stimuli. With this in mind, consider the 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology  
Volume 15, Edition 2  
 October 2015 
 
Page 8 of 12 
 
 
© The Author(s). This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0]. 
The IPJP is published in association with NISC (Pty) Ltd and Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
www.ipjp.org 
insights gleaned from Merleau-Ponty's event. 
 
Within the now-differentiated event of experience, 
the relationship between subjects and objects may 
now be considered in further detail. That the once 
disjunct events can become unified demonstrates their 
undifferentiatedness as elements of nature - that is, 
their mutual hyletic character. The experiencing 
subject may now be explored as the process of 
conscious discrimination. This can be understood less 
as an agentive action than as a possibility of being 
drawn into a particular relationship with an object. 
For example, Merleau-Ponty (1945/1962) compares 
"the relations" of subject and object - which he will 
later call sentient and sensible (1964/1968) -  "with 
those of the sleeper to his slumber". 
 
Sleep comes when a certain voluntary 
attitude suddenly receives from outside the 
confirmation for which it was waiting. I am 
breathing deeply and slowly in order to 
summon sleep, and suddenly it is as if my 
mouth were connected to some great lung 
outside myself which alternately calls forth 
and forces back my breath. A certain rhythm 
of respiration, which a moment ago I 
voluntarily maintained, now becomes my 
very being, and sleep, until now aimed at as a 
significance, suddenly becomes a situation. 
... [I]n the same way the sensible has not 
only a motor and vital significance, but is 
nothing other than a certain way of being in 
the world suggested to us from some point in 
space, and seized and acted upon by our 
body... . (pp. 211-212) 
 
Merleau-Ponty describes how the event of experience 
is not initiated by a subject but takes hold of an entity 
as a subject. It would be inaccurate to speak of sleep 
as something that is actively managed by a subject. In 
the subject we find qualities that more closely 
resemble a classical object—the latter unable to 
exercise control over its own actions or environment. 
Even before the introduction of the term "reversibility", 
Merleau-Ponty is thus confronting the possibility of 
reversible flesh. As efforts continue in the direction of 
understanding the subjectivity of nonhuman entities 
(e.g., the conference and workshop on Approaching 
Posthumanism and the Posthuman, held in Geneva in 
June 2015), we can expect to see a greater 
sophistication in the latter's investigation. For the 
moment, however, it is only important that we see the 
space that Husserl and Merleau-Ponty alike have 
made for such investigation in his ontology. 
 
Entities that resist intentional capture: Hyletic or 
material data 
We have seen how Merleau-Ponty (1945/1962) has 
made room in his ontology to allow for Husserl's 
hylé: it is only by virtue of the ontological identity of 
undifferentiated worldly entities as hylé that subject-
object reversibility is possible. This conceptualization 
avoids the suggestion that the sleeper is, for the most 
part, a subject, to whom all of the privileges of 
subjectivity are awarded. Instead, it may be 
understood that one must also look to the conditions 
out of which intentionality emerged - that is, the 
hyletic or material data - "which", we remember, 
"contains in itself nothing intentional". 
 
The question remains as to whether or not we can 
understand hyletic data before it is captured by 
intentionality. This has been the goal in the efforts of 
what could be termed the post-phenomenologies - 
Bogost's Alien Phenomenology and Trigg's "Unhuman 
Phenomenology" and The Thing: A Phenomenology of 
Horror. Bogost (2012) specifically targets the being 
of nonhuman objects and speculates about their 
relations with one another. Trigg (2013) targets the 
uncanny elements in human experience. Both authors 
attempt to push phenomenological ontology beyond 
the boundary of determining the world's significance 
only through human consciousness. Such attempts are 
not unfamiliar to Merleau-Ponty - certainly not in 
The Visible and the Invisible, but also not in his 
Phenomenology of Perception. In the latter, he may 
be found outlining the vague and uncertain haze of 
ontologically pre-established entities:  
 
 
One cannot, as we have said, conceive any 
perceived thing without someone to perceive 
it. But the fact remains that the thing presents 
itself to the person who perceives it as a thing 
in itself, and thus poses the problem of a 
genuine in-itself-for-us. Ordinarily we do not 
notice this because our perception, in the 
context of our everyday concerns, alights on 
things sufficiently attentively to discover in 
them their familiar presence, but not 
sufficiently so to disclose the nonhuman 
element which lies hidden in them. (p. 322) 
 
Merleau-Ponty begins by telling us that, insofar as a 
thing is perceived as a thing, then its identity as an 
object is already established in relation to the 
subjectivity by whom it is perceived. This is to say 
that an object as object may be understood through 
the event of familiarity to a subject. This experience 
is often attributed to the object: it is because of the 
object that one has an experience of familiarity. But 
the object as object is incapable of presenting as an 
ambiguity. Indeed, a null objective form would be no 
object at all - its objectivity would remain 
unestablished. It would thus be ontologically neutral: 
neither object nor subject. We have called entities 
with this ontological neutrality hylé because they 
form the stratum from which intentionality has yet to 
emerge. 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology  
Volume 15, Edition 2  
 October 2015 
 
Page 9 of 12 
 
 
© The Author(s). This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0]. 
The IPJP is published in association with NISC (Pty) Ltd and Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
www.ipjp.org 
Correlationism requires that an entity may only be 
understood as an object - and, moreover, an object-
for-me. This position thus begins by limiting the 
possibility of understanding the ontological depth of 
objects. Object-Oriented Ontology (OOO) attempts to 
correct this position by tracing the relationships of 
objects with other objects - that is, exploring the 
object in-itself-for-other-objects. OOO recognizes 
that there is more to a thing than meets the (human) 
eye. But it is important to assert that, in this passage, 
Merleau-Ponty is not conceding that the object in-
itself-for-me exhausts the entity of the depth of its 
being. He indicates that there is quite likely a non-
human element which withdraws from any human 
view - an element that belongs to the entity which 
cannot be captured by the human subject. Here he 
continues: 
 
But the thing holds itself aloof from us and 
remains self-sufficient. This will become 
clear if we suspend our ordinary pre-
occupations and pay a metaphysical and 
disinterested attention to it. It is then hostile 
and alien, no longer an interlocutor, but a 
resolutely silent other, a Self which evades us 
no less than does intimacy with an outside 
consciousness. (p. 322) 
 
It may be understood that the "thing" to which 
Merleau-Ponty is referring in this passage is hylé. A 
thing that remains aloof to me is no object of my 
perception, nor is it a familiar physiognomy. As it 
lurks about on the borders of my subjectivity, it 
resolutely resists capture. I may descend upon it with 
my gaze, thereby possessing it as a familiar thing, but 
grasping only its in-itself-for-me. The lurking thing 
might also be the winter 'flu - content to hover at the 
periphery of my consciousness for several days 
through barely discernible manifestations of fatigue, 
cognitive unclarity, aches and depression until at last 
it descends upon me in all of its fury, demanding of 
me all that is most 'flu-like. In this instance, it is I 
who am at the mercy of the virus. 
 
Conclusion: Ultimate Consciousness and Ultimate 
Subjectivity 
 
Husserl (1913/2002) and Merleau-Ponty (1945/1962) 
have both indicated a possible consequence of deeply 
considering the hylé as an antecedent condition for 
intentionality. If it is accepted that one could 
investigate the as yet ontologically undifferentiated 
matter - that is, hylé - then how does one overcome 
the dualism of matter and form? Must we concede 
that Husserl's "twofold bed" of phenomenology 
admits a dualism? To be sure, this is a question that 
has been central to Eastern contemplative traditions 
for over twenty-five centuries. Husserl and Merleau-
Ponty alike come up against this problem, although 
neither solves the conundrum in a satisfactory 
manner. This is perfectly understandable. 
 
Husserl notes how "intentionality ... resembled a 
universal medium which in the last resort includes 
within itself all experiences, even those that are not 
characterized as intentional" (p. 174). This line of 
thinking, he admits, "stops short of descending into 
the obscure depths of the ultimate consciousness 
which constitutes the whole scheme of temporal 
experience...". With the aid of speculation, Husserl 
seems to be suggesting a meta-intentionality in which 
hylé and morphe form a meaningful unity. This is the 
Greek equivalent of the Eastern riddle that matter is 
form and form is matter. 
 
While Husserl solves the duality of matter and form 
by fusing them into an ultimate consciousness, 
Merleau-Ponty (1945/1962) solves this by dissolving 
the categories entirely. He writes: 
 
There is no hylé, no sensation which is not in 
communication with other sensations or the 
sensations of other people, and for this very 
reason there is no morphe, no apprehension 
or apperception, the office of which is to give 
significance to a matter that has none, and to 
ensure the a priori unity of my experience. 
(p. 405) 
 
Whereas Husserl unifies hylé and morphe into the 
ultimate intentional consciousness, Merleau-Ponty 
refuses to allow the participation of a "primordial I" 
(p. 404). For to posit an ultimate consciousness would 
run into the infinite regress of positing a thing for 
which the primordial I could become conscious, and 
so on. Instead of collapsing hylé and morphe, 
Merleau-Ponty has dissolved them, concluding that 
"[t]he belief in an absolute mind, or in a world in 
itself detached from us, is no more than a 
rationalization of this primordial faith" (p. 409). For 
now, it is safe to conclude that phenomenological 
ontology has not yet solved the 25-century-old riddle 
of the antinomy and unity of matter and form. 
 
In this paper, I have defended a phenomenological 
ontology that follows the speculative realist critique 
of correlationism. This is important, because this 
critique implies that phenomenology is incapable of 
extending beyond the mid-20th century intentional 
subject. I have argued that this criticism is an 
insightful, but nevertheless not debilitating, one for 
phenomenological ontology. It is insightful because it 
allows phenomenologists to retire from the battle 
against the 19th century mechanomorphism of the 
human. It is not debilitating because phenomenology 
has always been broader than its critique of 19th 
century mechanomorphism and emphases on human 
experience and existence. To make this last point, I 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology  
Volume 15, Edition 2  
 October 2015 
 
Page 10 of 12 
 
 
© The Author(s). This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0]. 
The IPJP is published in association with NISC (Pty) Ltd and Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
www.ipjp.org 
have returned to Husserl's (1913/2002) discussion of 
hylé, which has been demonstrated through Merleau-
Ponty's Phenomenology of Perception. In these we 
have found an ontology that is broad enough to allow 
phenomenologists to explore hylé and nous. In order 
for phenomenological ontology to survive the 
criticism that it is correlationist, it must also allow for 
the phenomenological emphasis on hylé. This is not a 
new or even radical idea in phenomenology, as 
Husserl has shown. However, it has been long 
overshadowed by the once-important defensive 
posturing against 19th century brands of realism. This 
demon, speculative realists have demonstrated, has 
been exorcised. 
 
 
 
 
Referencing Format 
 
Whitehead, P. (2015). Phenomenology without correlationism: Husserl's hyletic material. Indo-Pacific Journal of 
Phenomenology, 15(2), 12 pp. doi: 10.1080/20797222.2015.1101830 
 
 
 
 
About the Author 
 
 
Patrick Whitehead 
Faculty of Social Science 
Darton State College, Albany, USA 
E-mail address:  patrick.whitehead@darton.edu 
 
 
Patrick Whitehead is an Assistant Professor of Psychology at Darton State College in Albany, 
Georgia, USA. He completed his PhD under the supervision of Christopher M. Aanstoos at 
the University of West Georgia in 2014. 
 
Dr Whitehead writes on a variety of topics including phenomenological psychology, philosophy and theory of 
psychology, and critical pedagogy. His work has been published in The Humanistic Psychologist, and he has 
presented papers at a number of interdisciplinary phenomenology conferences (SPEP, ICNAP, IHSRC, among 
others). 
 
In his free time he is a long-distance running enthusiast. 
 
 
 
 
References 
 
Appelbaum, D. (1993). Everyday spirits. Albany, NY: SUNY Press. 
 
Barbaras, R. (2004). The being of the phenomenon: Merleau-Ponty's ontology (T. Toadvine & L. Lawlor, Trans.). 
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press. (Original work published 1991) 
 
Bogost, I. (2012). Alien phenomenology, or What it's like to be a thing. Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota University 
Press. 
 
Braidotti, R. (2013). The posthuman. Malden, MA: Polity Press. 
 
Brentano, F. C. von. (2002). Psychology from an empirical standpoint: Foreword from the 1874 edition (A. C. 
Rancurello, D. B. Terrell, & L. L. McAlister, Trans.). In D. Moran & T. Mooney (Eds.), The phenomenology 
reader (pp. 32-34). New York, NY: Routledge. (Reprinted from Psychology from an empirical standpoint, pp. 
xxvii-xxix, by F. von Brentano, 1995, New York, NY: Routledge.). (Original work published 1874) 
 
Bryant, L., Srnicek, N., & Harman, G. (2011). The speculative turn: Continental materialism and realism. 
Melbourne, AUS: re.press. 
 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology  
Volume 15, Edition 2  
 October 2015 
 
Page 11 of 12 
 
 
© The Author(s). This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0]. 
The IPJP is published in association with NISC (Pty) Ltd and Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
www.ipjp.org 
Cobb, J. B., & Griffin, D. R. (1977). Mind in nature: Essays on the interface of science and philosophy. Washington, 
DC: University Press of America. 
 
Dillon, M. C. (1998). Merleau-Ponty's ontology (2nd ed.). Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press. (Original 
work published in 1988) 
 
Goldstein, K. (1995). The organism: A holistic approach to biology derived from pathological data in man. Boston, 
MA: Zone Books. (Original work published 1934) 
 
Harman, G. (2005). Guerilla metaphysics: Phenomenology and the carpentry of things. Chicago, IL: Open Court. 
 
Harman, G. (2006). Tool-being: Heidegger and the metaphysics of objects. Chicago, IL: Open Court. (Original work 
published 2002) 
 
Harman, G. (2011). Quentin Meillassoux: Philosophy in the making. Edinburgh, UK: Edinburgh University Press. 
 
Heidegger, M. (1962). Being and time (J. Macquarrie & E. Robinson, Trans.). New York, NY: Harper & Rowe. 
(Original work published 1927) 
 
Heidegger, M. (2012). Contributions to philosophy (of the event) (R. Rojcewicz & D. Vallega-Neu, Trans.). 
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press. (Original work published 1936-1938) 
 
Henry, M. (2008). Material phenomenology (S. Davidson, Trans.). New York, NY: Fordham University Press. 
(Original work published 1990) 
 
Husserl, E. (1970). The crisis of European sciences and transcendental phenomenology: An introduction to 
phenomenological philosophy (D. Carr, Trans.). Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press. (Original work 
published 1936) 
 
Husserl, E. (2002). Ideas: General introduction to pure phenomenology (D. Moran, Ed.; W. R. B. Gibson, Trans.).  
New York, NY: Routledge. (Original work published 1913) 
 
Köhler, W. (1947). Gestalt psychology (Rev. ed.). New York, NY: Liveright Publishing Company. (Original work 
published 1929) 
 
Levinas, E. (1969). Totality and infinity: Essays on exteriority (A. Lingis, Trans.). Pittsburgh, PA: Duquesne 
University Press. (Original work published 1961) 
 
Meillassoux, Q. (2012). After finitude: An essay on the necessity of contingency (R. Brassier, Trans.). London, UK: 
Bloomsbury Academic. (Original work published 2003) 
 
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1962). Phenomenology of perception (C. Smith, Trans.). New York, NY: The Humanities Press. 
(Original work published 1945) 
 
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1963). The structure of behaviour (A. L. Fisher, Trans.). Pittsburgh, PA: Duquesne University 
Press. (Original work written 1938 and published 1942) 
 
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1964). Primacy of perception, and other essays on phenomenological psychology, the 
philosophy of art, history and politics (J. M. Edie, Trans.). Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press. 
(Original work published 1947) 
 
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1968). The visible and the invisible (C. Lefort, Ed., & A. Lingis, Trans.). Evanston, IL: 
Northwestern University Press. (Original work published 1964) 
 
Merleau-Ponty, M. (2003). Nature: Course notes from the Collège de France (Compiled & annotated by D. Séglard; 
R. Vallier, Trans.). Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press. (Original work prepared 1956-1960 and 
published 1995) 
 
Rosen, S. M.  (2008). The self-evolving cosmos: A phenomenological approach to nature's unity in diversity. 
Hackensack, NJ: World Scientific Publishing Co. 
 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology  
Volume 15, Edition 2  
 October 2015 
 
Page 12 of 12 
 
 
© The Author(s). This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0]. 
The IPJP is published in association with NISC (Pty) Ltd and Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
www.ipjp.org 
Trigg, D. (2013). The horror of darkness: Toward an unhuman phenomenology. Speculations: Journal of Speculative 
Realism, 4, 113-121.  
 
Trigg, D. (2014). The thing: A phenomenology of horror. Alresford, UK: Zero Books. 
 
Wertheimer, M. (1959). Productive thinking (Rev. ed.). New York, NY: Harper. (Original work published 1945) 
 
Whitehead, P. M. (2014). A. N. Whitehead, Merleau-Ponty, and the phenomenological psycho-physical sub-objective 
event of experience (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of West Georgia, Carrollton, GA. 
 
Wolfe, C. (2011). What is posthumanism? Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota University Press. 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
 

