Indo-Paciﬁc Journal of Phenomenology
ISSN: 2079-7222 (Print) 1445-7377 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/ripj20
Phenomenology as a Potential Methodology for
Subjective Knowing in Science Education Research
Oscar Koopman
To cite this article: Oscar Koopman (2015) Phenomenology as a Potential Methodology for
Subjective Knowing in Science Education Research, Indo-Paciﬁc Journal of Phenomenology,
15:1, 1-10, DOI: 10.1080/20797222.2015.1049898
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/20797222.2015.1049898
© 2015 The Author(s).
Published online: 26 May 2015.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 3462
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 6 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ripj20

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology  
 Volume 15, Edition 1  
 May 2015 
 
        Page 1 of 10 
ISSN (online) : 1445-7377 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                     ISSN (print) : 2079-7222 
 
 
© The Author(s). This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0]. 
The IPJP is published in association with NISC (Pty) Ltd and Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
www.ipjp.org 
DOI: dx.doi.org/10.1080/20797222.2015.1049898 
 
 
 
Phenomenology as a Potential Methodology 
for Subjective Knowing in Science Education Research 
 
by Oscar Koopman 
 
 
Abstract 
 
This paper charts the journey that led to the author's discovery of phenomenology as a potential 
research methodology in the field of science education, and describes the impact on his own 
thinking and approach of his encounters with the work of Husserl and Heidegger, Merleau-Ponty 
and Van Manen. Drawing on this theoretical framework, the author argues that, as a methodology 
for investigating scientific thinking in relation to life experience, learning and curriculum design, 
phenomenology not only provides a means of accessing subjective knowing and pure perception, 
but is sufficiently rigorous and systematic to represent the lifeworld experiences of research 
participants with a high degree of accuracy. In the process, he highlights the uniqueness and 
value of phenomenology in relation to quantitative and other qualitative research methods. The 
aim of this paper is to inspire insight into the value in science education research of using a 
methodology that fosters a deeper understanding of both teachers' and learners' lived experience 
of the scientific world. The challenge to science specialists, whether educators or researchers, 
would be to shift their default mode of understanding from the object pole to the ego pole, from 
the physical object to the human subject, from the observable and measurable to the lived as the 
true source of human knowledge. 
 
 
 
Personal Introduction 
 
In 2010, I commenced my doctoral research into the 
lived experiences of black Physical Science teachers 
when they were introduced to a new curriculum. My 
research focused on the following question: What do 
Physical Science teachers really think they are doing 
in the classroom? My quest was to examine the 
lifeworld of Physical Science teachers from the 
perspectives of genealogy (that is, how did their 
specialized knowledge of physical science unfold in 
their lives as learners and subsequently as teachers?) 
and portraiture (that is, how did dramatic events in 
their personal lives, and circumstances such as 
curriculum change, inform the process of their 
becoming Physical Science teachers?). I resolved to 
focus on both phenomena because learning is a 
formal as well as an informal process. For example, 
most of what we learned as children was neither 
planned nor deliberate. Indeed, we learned to 
construct our understanding of the world from our 
interactions with nature, our parents, and our peers. 
At times we needed to be directed by a teacher, a 
form of learning that requires structure and planning. 
From the genealogical angle, I wanted to provide an 
auto-phenomenographic account of each teacher's 
experiences from childhood to adulthood, and, from 
the portraiture angle, a descriptive narrative of how 
the teachers represent their lived experiences around 
the fluid educational landscape of curriculum change 
through the subject of Physical Science. The main 
challenge was to find a method that would allow me 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology  
Volume 15, Edition 1  
 May 2015 
 
Page 2 of 10 
 
 
© The Author(s). This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0]. 
The IPJP is published in association with NISC (Pty) Ltd and Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
www.ipjp.org 
 
to answer the research question truthfully and 
accurately - that is, a method that would give me 
access to the thoughts and consciousness of the 
teachers in order to excavate their eidetic residuum or 
photographic mental residues that would present their 
lived experiences from their own personal points of 
view. Initially, I thought that an ethnographic method 
was the answer, but I soon realised that I could not 
research the teachers' experiences adequately or 
authentically from the outside. 
 
A scholarly work which assisted me in my search for 
a method that would allow me to sketch the lifeworld 
of the teachers was Van Manen's Researching Lived 
Experience (1990). Along with providing me with a 
preferred method, namely phenomenology, Van 
Manen's work not only assisted me in grasping the 
essence of phenomenology, but taught me that 
educational research is a "caring act", to be followed 
through with a deep sense of thoughtfulness and 
empathy. I further learned that phenomenology aims 
to express the essence of what it means to be a child 
or adult, without needing any further explanation or 
specification about the respondent. Like Devenish 
(2002) in his phenomenological doctoral study, I also 
struggled to grasp the concept of the phenomenon of 
being. Merleau-Ponty's Phenomenology of Perception 
(1945/1962) deepened my confusion, as he places 
even more emphasis on the act of caring and 
exemplifies the significance of embodiment and place 
in the process of knowledge acquisition. I discovered 
that the body is both an object and a subject because 
the concept of the body is linked to both 
epistemology and ontology. For example, a foot is an 
object of observation but becomes a subject when it is 
used to kick a ball or to walk. Sartre's Being and 
Nothingness (1943/1956) questions the subject-object 
dichotomy with reference to different states of being. 
He draws attention to our "own being" in relation 
both to others and to ourselves. Being "in relation to 
others" is the struggle to comprehend or define 
individual existence directly or indirectly in relation 
to others' existence. This happens when the concrete 
reality a person portrays appears to be subjective in 
relation to the surrounding objects. On the other hand, 
"being in itself" transforms the subject-object relation 
into a subject-subject relation when individual reality 
becomes the person's thoughts and consciousness as 
perceived by the observer. 
 
After immersing myself in these ontological and 
epistemological "re-presentations" of the world and 
my place in it, I realised that positivistic methods 
were inherently deficient in that they often ignore the 
"being" aspects of the human spirit and focus more 
on "mathematizing" human behaviour. As the aim of 
my study leaned more towards unveiling the essence 
of cause - that is, the challenges Physical Science 
teachers face in respect of the curriculum, content 
knowledge and pedagogical praxis - I needed a 
method that was closely connected to what it means 
"to be". For the positivist, this concept is objectively 
defined and depends on how well the evidence is 
quantified. According to Levering (2006, p. 454), if 
positivist accounts hold true, the individual's 
observations of the phenomena in nature are no 
longer based on sense experience but rather on a 
mathematization thereof. In other words, Levering 
holds that positivist knowledge is subject to the 
quantification of facts which, he argues, eliminates 
the human sense experiences of vision, sight, smell, 
taste and touch. This postulate made me question the 
manner in which science constructs or represents the 
world. I became conscious of what Husserl, the father 
of phenomenology, must have thought when he saw 
Europe lying in ruins at the end of World War I. (See 
Husserl, 1936/1970, for a full account.) 
 
Husserl (1936/1970) attributes the horrific devastation 
witnessed to the "technologizing" of science which, 
in his view, was a step in the wrong direction. He 
furthermore argues that such damage results when 
people cut themselves off from the value of lived 
experience and allow science to predict and explain 
human experiences. In opposition to this approach, 
Husserl formulated a new philosophical approach that 
calls for an epistemological reversal of how people 
view the world. This reversal relegates mathematics 
to a lower level than lived experience, with the result 
that the latter becomes the primary source in the data-
construction process and the fundamental starting 
point in the search for the essence of being (Husserl, 
1929/1975 & 1925/1977). 
 
The philosophical thought of Heidegger (1926/1967), 
Husserl (1936/1970, 1929/1975, 1913/1983), Merleau-
Ponty (1945/1962) and Sartre (1943/1956) liberated 
me from the constraints of positivistic thinking. Like 
a bird released from a cage, I experienced science 
anew and recognised the viability of phenomenology 
as a research methodology that would assist me in 
answering my research question. In line with the 
description of phenomenology as a way of seeing 
how things really unfold, Locke (1689/2009, p. 2) 
similarly holds that knowledge is rooted in, and 
ultimately derives its meaning from, experience. It 
follows that knowledge is neither the internalization 
of extraneous information nor the unfolding of 
spontaneous impulses and emotions; rather, it inheres 
in the reciprocity between an individual and his or her 
spatio-temporal settings. As such, this view of 
knowledge encapsulates the moments of knowing that 
an individual encounters in his or her lifeworld. I 
realised that these subjective moments of knowing are 
the lived-through experiences - or, in Locke's words, 
the "intuition" - of each Physical Science teacher 
participating in 
my 
study. 
By 
employing 
a 
phenomenological research design to explore their 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology  
Volume 15, Edition 1  
 May 2015 
 
Page 3 of 10 
 
 
© The Author(s). This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0]. 
The IPJP is published in association with NISC (Pty) Ltd and Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
www.ipjp.org 
 
lived experiences, I could gain entry into the inner 
world of each research participant. Willis (2002, p. 2) 
points out that the aim of phenomenological research 
is to arrive at an accurate understanding and 
description of moments of knowing as they appear in 
the consciousness of individuals. 
 
The principal aim of this paper is to encourage 
science education researchers to recognize the 
potential of phenomenology as a methodology to 
explore the "natural attitude" of their research 
participants. This natural attitude is found in the 
phenomenological reduction deeply embedded in the 
consciousness of individuals. A related aim of this 
paper is to encourage researchers to view their 
research participants as subjective epistemological 
beings in order to report their experiences without 
contaminating the data with extraneous worldview 
presuppositions, preconceived ideas and notions, or 
strongly held beliefs. 
 
Husserlian and Heideggerian Philosophy 
 
Curious to know more about this humanistic method, 
I searched a number of local and international 
education and science education journals for 
phenomenological studies that echo the voices of the 
participants in order to gain more insight into and 
understanding of the daily realities of South African 
Physical Science teachers and/or learners. In most of 
these studies, the authors use either ethnographic, 
interpretative, case-study, or experiential research 
methods to answer a specific research question. These 
studies overlook the lived experiences of teachers and 
learners, and the authors appear to be distant from the 
lifeworld of their research participants. Therefore the 
represented images of conceptual schemes appear to 
be idealisations, removed from the preconceptual, 
pre-theoretical, familiar and concrete world of 
teachers and learners. These studies fail to see into the 
heart of those moments that matter most to both 
teachers and learners (Van Manen, 2007, p. 11), and 
which, in the South African context, are important 
insofar as they can provide policy makers, curriculum 
designers and teacher educators with new insights 
into curriculum change in relation to the Physical 
Sciences. In contrast to the limitations of the methods 
employed in these studies, phenomenology elucidates 
the relation between "being and acting, between who 
we are and what we are, between thoughtfulness and 
tact" (Van Manen, 2007, p. 13).  
 
Phenomenology as a method is effectively summed 
up by Husserl's famous dictum that it is essential to 
return to the things themselves ("Zurück zu den Sachen 
selbst!") (Husserl, 1901/2001, p. 168). He explains 
the central implication of this when he writes: "We 
must not make assertions about that which we do not 
ourselves see" (Husserl, 1929/1975, p. 9). The German 
word "Sachen" does not refer to physical objects, but 
rather to ideas which are subconsciously held. These 
subconsciously held ideas have their roots in those 
personal experiences that matter most to us. 
Koestenbaum (1961/1975, p. xix) clarifies that, 
according to Husserl, the only way to access these 
subconsciously held ideas or structures of knowledge 
is 
through 
a 
consciousness 
unburdened 
with 
preconceived ideas or notions derived from the 
individual's personal experience or perceptions. This 
approach, according to Husserl, generates "pure 
presentations" or "uninterpreted sense data" derived 
from experience (ibid., p. xxiii). Husserl holds that an 
individual's consciousness is reflected in his presence 
in the world, which represents his or her intentionality 
- that is, the directedness of his or her consciousness 
towards the object of thought. From this I learned that 
what is required from a phenomenologist in the field 
is to behave like someone who is watching and 
enjoying a film, without analysing its aesthetic, 
sociological and technical aspects. When the film is 
finished, the analyses must be carried out objectively 
and independently of any emotional involvement and 
unsubstantiated criticism. Husserl uses the phrase 
"epoché" to explain the process of bracketing the self. 
In his view, this bracketing refers to the mathematical 
principle of bracketing an equation. By implication, 
that which is inside the brackets has no connection 
with any terms and numbers outside of it. In other 
words, the experience as divulged in a conversation 
must be treated as indubitable "givenness" that 
represents an individual's consciousness free from 
opinion or correction. In relation to my research, this 
meant that, during the data analysis, I had to enter a 
totally presuppositionless space by suspending all 
possible interpretations and meaning. It required from 
me to read the transcription of each interview with 
openness and to enter the individual's world in order 
to extract meaning from what the person was saying. 
It must be stated that at times this is difficult, because 
each participant has his or her own unique way of 
experiencing temporality, spatiality, and materiality, 
but each of these co-ordinates must be understood in 
relation both to others and to the respondent's own 
inner world (Hycner, 1985, p. 29). 
 
Given the complex structures and notions of 
Husserl's thought, I realised that phenomenology 
could be a minefield for novices. The reason is that, 
although phenomenology does not make use of 
inductive techniques, it is not entirely independent of 
these. However, in the data-collection process, any 
experience must serve as foundation data in order for 
the researcher to arrive at a clear understanding of the 
lived world of individuals. In other words, according 
to Husserl (1925/1977), mental acts, including the 
objects in the person's memory, point towards some 
"Sachen" or matters of importance that are external to 
the individual. These matters of importance are 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology  
Volume 15, Edition 1  
 May 2015 
 
Page 4 of 10 
 
 
© The Author(s). This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0]. 
The IPJP is published in association with NISC (Pty) Ltd and Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
www.ipjp.org 
 
presented to individuals as an object-for-a-subject. 
For example, the scent of a rose, the taste of an apple, 
or personal feelings become an experience that 
crystallizes in the consciousness of individuals. These 
experiences become intermeshed with an ever-present 
pure consciousness, leading to the observer constantly 
having to re-examine existing perceptions. Therefore, 
reality, or the lived world of individuals, can rightly 
be said to be external to the observer, just as the 
reader of a book is external to the book itself 
(Koestenbaum, 1961/1975, p. liii). 
 
Heidegger's Being and Time (1926/1967), dedicated 
to Husserl, developed Husserl's ideas further and 
adopted an ontological stance towards his philosophy 
of phenomenology. Heidegger's focus leaned more 
towards the nature of being rather than "becoming to 
know". Rekindling the debate about the meaning of 
what he terms dasein, Heidegger asserted that 
consciousness is not separate from the world but a 
formation of historically lived experiences. He 
believed that people are self-interpreting beings - that 
to live is to listen and to derive meaning from 
experience. In The Essence of Truth (1932/2002), 
Heidegger attempted to understand and explain the 
nature of shared meaning among human beings in 
terms of what a culture gives a person from birth as a 
way of understanding the world. He strongly believed 
in the importance of context, which he defined as 
time and space. His notion of phenomenology is 
inductive and descriptive by nature and focuses on, or 
recognises, the importance of the subjectivity of 
experience. 
 
Heidegger's (1926/1967, 1932/2002) philosophy 
assisted me in faithfully representing the essence of 
the data transcriptions. This involved meticulously 
scrutinizing each word, phrase, sentence and 
paragraph in the interview transcripts in order to distil 
the true nature and essence of each participant's 
everyday involvement with the world. The interview 
as a whole provided a context for the emergence of 
specific meanings and events. From this I could 
deduce the fundamental reasons why the individual 
research participants behaved the way they did. It 
allowed me entry into their consciousness, which 
unveiled the tangible structures of their experiences. 
From this I could represent why they said what they 
said and how these events unfolded in their lives as 
Physical Science teachers 
 
Within the context of this paper, educational research, 
or research that involves human beings, is construed 
as a not only necessary but imperative move away 
from positivistic and interpretative paradigms that 
speak directly to the object pole. It is through the ego 
pole (the element of consciousness) that human 
beings can see and grasp the essence of a 
phenomenon. The transition from the object pole to 
the ego pole brings us closer to an understanding of 
what is really happening in the mind of the individual, 
or what Husserl (1925/1977) considers to be truth. 
Heidegger (1932/2002) avers that truth, in essence, 
speaks of "unhiddenness" (p. 8), insofar as it refers to 
that which is no longer hidden or has been torn away 
from hiddenness [Verborgenheit]. In his view, truth 
has little to do with factual context, but rather reveals 
the unhiddenness that speaks about directedness 
arising from fundamental experiences in the real 
world (pp. 5-7). This leads to a discussion of the 
value of lived experience in science education. 
 
The Value of Researching Lived Experience 
 
Van Manen (1990) defines a methodology as the 
philosophical 
framework 
that 
underpins 
the 
fundamental assumptions and characteristics of 
human science. Carr (2006), in turn, states that a 
methodology refers to the "theoretical rationale ... that 
justifies the research method appropriate to a field of 
study" (p. 422). It follows that a methodology cannot 
be derived from research, but must instead be 
grounded in a priori theoretical knowledge, usually 
referred to as philosophy. In the natural sciences, an 
investigation is not guided by a specific methodology 
but by a pluralist view of methodology. Researchers 
are guided by the aim and subject matter of their 
discipline and develop a methodology accordingly. 
Therefore, from a humanities point of view, the 
research subject is presumed to be the starting and 
end point of the research process. This is often 
ignored by researchers, with the result that the textual 
expression of the essences is in the form of findings, 
which are an incomplete view of the participant on 
the continuum of his or her lived world.  
 
According to Husserl (1913/1983, p. 5), cognition 
begins and ends with experience. Gadamer (1960/ 
1975, p. 34) argues that experience has a condensing 
and intensifying meaning. He maintains that the 
totality of experience is found in the "significant 
whole", which refers to not only the momentary 
presence to consciousness of what is experienced, but 
to its unity with the whole of a person's entire life 
experience as an integral part of its permanent 
presence. Koestenbaum (1961/1975, p. xxxviii) notes 
that, in Husserl's view, this whole or unity of an 
object of experience is something that is given among 
various appearances and not something separate and 
alongside it. It is considered a structural nexus that is 
contextually connected to reflect upon so as to give it 
a significant quality of meaning. Therefore, according 
to Husserl, phenomenology is a form of inquiry that 
holistically describes the research participants' lived 
experience of meaning-making and informs us about 
their perception of the focal object or phenomenon. 
These perceptions can provide phenomenological 
researchers with the necessary conceptual tools to 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology  
Volume 15, Edition 1  
 May 2015 
 
Page 5 of 10 
 
 
© The Author(s). This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0]. 
The IPJP is published in association with NISC (Pty) Ltd and Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
www.ipjp.org 
 
understand human behaviour and actions and to do 
something about the latter when necessary. 
 
In view of the above, phenomenology is both a theory 
and a method. Its epistemological and ontological 
disposition is predicated on the lived world or lived 
experiences of individuals. As a methodology, its 
ontological representation suggests serious and 
original thinking about how individuals perceive or 
understand the world. The essence, however, of a 
phenomenological study is the endeavour to answer 
the question of what it means to be (Groenewald, 
2004; Heidegger, 1926/1967). Answering this question 
requires an active science with a unique methodology. 
In such a paradigm, the attitude of the researcher 
should not be one of superiority in relation to the 
participant's understanding of the world. According 
to Heidegger (1926/1967, p. 38), the essence of being 
(dasein) lies in existence. The question of existence 
can only be addressed through "existing", which 
implies that it is only through engaging with lived 
experience that our existence in general can be 
interrogated. Heidegger invites us to think of a 
particular self-interpretation that a given dasein lives 
out: the existential possibility it chooses to enact as an 
existential understanding, which he describes as an 
ontic 
state. 
In 
other 
words, 
in 
Heidegger's 
conceptualization of being, dasein provides the 
richest, most complete and most revelationary way of 
engaging with a phenomenon in fundamental 
ontology. In this way, people gain an understanding 
of what it is that they comprehend about a particular 
phenomenon. 
 
Dasein, or the search for understanding about 
understanding, can be conceptualised as a non-
methodological journey whereby the researcher enters 
a space (domain) of personalness that calls for a 
personal engagement with the subjectivity of another 
(Heidegger, 1926/1967, p. 41). This is critical in the 
research context, because the participants' description 
of the world must be rendered in their own words, as 
distinct from the researcher's verbal account of it. In 
order to understand how they experience the world, 
the participants themselves must thus verbally 
construct their personal world and the meaning 
derived from it. One way of ensuring this is to return 
the written summary of each participant's description 
to him or her for a validity check and to involve the 
participant in considering the accuracy of the 
researcher's description of the experience. In so doing, 
the participant can confirm whether or not the 
information has been correctly captured and whether 
or not any corrections are needed. Furthermore, the 
participant should be given the freedom to add or 
remove 
information. 
Based 
on 
this 
premise, 
phenomenology is essentially interested in the 
subject's epistemological and ontological disposition. 
In other words, the phenomenologist asks what the 
truth is about this or that and strives to express it in an 
uncontaminated (unbiased) way in order faithfully to 
reflect not only others' understanding of their own 
experience, but a rational understanding on his or her 
own part of what it means to be using pure data, 
which is also termed lived-through data, as discussed 
later in this paper. 
 
Dasein is a question of both the present and the past. 
Our existence in its entirety includes our preceding 
existence; therefore, we are not only present now but 
represent the fusion of our past, present and future. It 
is common knowledge that past occurrences can 
significantly affect the present and the future. 
Heidegger (1926/1967, p. 3) argues that the present, 
the past and the future are the collective theme of all 
human phenomena of experience. A person's 
existence or experience thus cannot be accurately 
understood or explained without considering the 
interconnectedness of the present, the past and the 
future. For this reason, phenomenology as a method 
goes against the grain of the orthodox scientific 
attitude, which focuses on the object pole rather than 
on embracing the subjective world of the individual 
(Levering, 2006, p. 454). For example, fear can 
neither be objectively understood nor measured. 
Spanos (1976) argues that the only way to understand 
a phenomenon (in this case, fear) as experienced by 
another would be to live in both the body and the 
consciousness of the person and actually experience it 
from that perspective. Otherwise, all that we can 
observe is an inner self that shows up on the outside, 
but can never be understood. This is not to say that 
interpretative, quantitative and mixed methodologies 
cannot produce trustworthy or reliable data. These 
methodologies are, however, inadequate for the 
purposes of accurately describing or converting the 
data into fixed writing. A real-life event cannot be 
perfectly captured in writing, because language has 
limits in respect of what can or cannot be accurately 
represented. This accords with Derrida's (1967/1978) 
thesis that there is no stability in language and that it 
therefore cannot accurately describe a lived event or 
experience because dispositions such as mood, and 
phenomena such as fear and sadness, cannot be 
captured in language (p. 4). For the same reason, the 
person who aims to describe or report a phenomenon 
is forced by the limits of language to reduce the 
content in the process of translating his or her lived 
experience into a medium of expression that makes it 
accessible to the understanding of others. The notion 
of "embodiment", as described by Merleau-Ponty 
(1945/1962), may be of some help here. In Merleau-
Ponty's view, a person normally projects meaning 
that is constituted only in that person's own world. 
For the meaning of what has been formulated only 
through the medium of words to be embodied, "a 
human productive power must reveal itself". 
Merleau-Ponty (1945/1962, p. 112) refers to this as 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology  
Volume 15, Edition 1  
 May 2015 
 
Page 6 of 10 
 
 
© The Author(s). This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0]. 
The IPJP is published in association with NISC (Pty) Ltd and Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
www.ipjp.org 
 
"summoning", inferring "the sense in which a 
medium summons and causes an absent person to 
appear". In other words, through the medium of 
language, the spirit of what is not present can be 
summoned to make itself manifest in the present. 
 
In the present, things such as the disposition of mood 
and context are, for the most part, absent, leading to a 
misrepresentation of truth. In Heidegger's (1932/ 
2002) view, evidence becomes doubtful and can be 
regarded as everyday opinion if personal histories are 
taken as belonging to the past (p. 45). For Heidegger, 
it is only when the individual's background (context/ 
ontology) or historicity is foregrounded that the 
visible becomes meaningful and truthful. Therefore, a 
consideration of both the past and the present allows 
the voice of the participant to be reliably reported or 
represented. The inner voice of the participant 
becomes the first-person data needed to arrive at a 
proper understanding of the person's real, lived-in 
world. So, with specific reference to the research 
context of science education, instead of trying to 
theorize about the activities or behaviour of teachers 
"objectively", the researcher should allow the 
subjective nature of phenomenology to reflect the 
uniqueness and essences of their lifeworld with deep 
sensitivity. This begs the question as to how the 
uniqueness of a participant can be rendered in a 
trustworthy way and how phenomenology embraces 
this uniqueness. 
 
The Uniqueness of Phenomenology as a Research 
Method in the Search for Truth 
 
The reason that phenomenology is described as a 
"science of the unique" is because intuition is unique. 
Intuition is a pre-theoretical phenomenon that 
describes the directedness of consciousness towards 
an object. In its most basic form, intuition can be 
described as perception (Husserl, 1925/1977, p. 57), 
which represents the individual's understanding or 
view of, or ideas about, the world as revealed by or 
extracted from the eidetic residuum or eidos. Husserl 
uses the phrase "grasping and seeing" to express these 
sensations which are considered an active part of the 
way people think and construct the world in order to 
make sense of it. 
 
The two key phrases used in phenomenology to 
denote the process of extracting or capturing 
consciousness as revealed in people's eidetic residua 
are "lived world experience" or "lived-through 
experience". Husserl (1907/1997) conceived of lived 
experience in a mathematical spirit - that is, as a 
reflection-based elaboration of the structures or forms 
of experience in accordance with their prior 
possibilities, which infers a lack of concern with 
empirical matters of fact regarding the phenomena 
under study. Husserl explains this as follows: 
The conditions of the "possibility of 
experience" are the first. Conditions of the 
possibility of experience signify, and may 
signify, here, however, nothing else than all 
that resides immanently in the essence of 
experience, in its essentia, and thereby 
belongs to it irrevocably. The essence of 
experience, which is what is investigated in 
the phenomenological analysis of experience, 
is the same as the possibility of experience, 
and everything established about the essence, 
about the possibility of experience, is eo ipso 
a condition of the possibility of experience. 
(1907/1997, p. 119) 
 
In essence, experience should be referred to as first-
person data. This is because, in mathematics, the 
mathematician always starts with, "There are 7 
triangles ...". For this reason, Husserl (1907/1997, p. 
40) asserts the centrality of consciousness in human 
experience and points out that phenomenological data 
are "lived-through data". In this sense, the data given 
to someone are experiential, that is, preceding any 
reflection. Indeed, such data either are "lived through 
by" or are "experimentally given to" someone. In 
essence, data are not considered objectively and 
cannot be reflected upon by anyone else. Realities 
must therefore be treated as pure phenomena and as 
the only absolute data from where to begin. Husserl 
calls this the science of pure phenomena. 
 
Phenomenology emphasises the human experience 
and its experiential action in the world (Van Manen, 
1990), which is guided by consciousness. People's 
consciousness represents their ability to think. In 
essence, consciousness is not a matter of "I think" but 
firstly of "I am" (Merleau-Ponty, 1945/1962). "I am" 
refers to our existence in the world. According to 
phenomenologists, the domain of "I am" should be 
the starting and end point of research methods (Van 
Manen, 1990). Heidegger (1926/1967) argues that it 
is only then that our inquiry becomes a form of 
thinking aimed at understanding human life: 
 
The things for which we owe thanks are not 
things we have from ourselves. They are 
given to us. We receive many gifts, of many 
kinds. But the highest and really most 
lasting gift given to us is always our 
essential nature, with which we are gifted in 
such a way that we are what we are only 
through it. (p. 142) 
 
The above extract suggests that researchers in science 
education ought to position themselves in such a way 
that their understanding of the research participants 
becomes a self-transcendent reflection of how each 
participant sees himself or herself in the science 
classroom. This will methodologically foreclose the 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology  
Volume 15, Edition 1  
 May 2015 
 
Page 7 of 10 
 
 
© The Author(s). This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0]. 
The IPJP is published in association with NISC (Pty) Ltd and Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
www.ipjp.org 
 
elusive, ambiguous and tenuous views of the 
participant without the researcher seeking for motive, 
cause or agenda to provide a description of the 
experience. A descriptive account does not provide an 
effective theory with which to explain and control the 
world of the individual, but it affords the researcher 
the possibility of attaining plausible insights which 
might bring about a more direct contact with the 
world of the individual participant. Consequently, it 
raises the question as to what makes researching lived 
experience different from other quantitative or 
qualitative types of studies. 
 
Firstly, lived experiences are concerned with those 
areas of human existence that provide insight into the 
silent voices of consciousness, purposiveness and 
meaning. Insight provides a glimpse into what is 
happening in the mind of an individual, but without 
the certainty of a full understanding of the person. 
Understanding only becomes possible to the extent 
that researchers have methodologically secured 
themselves against any misunderstanding. Being alive 
or to live is neither a problem that researchers need to 
resolve, nor a mistake that needs to be corrected. 
Correct intentions will ensure that the questioning of 
human existence will not reduce the human agent to 
an object without reflecting on the entirety of the 
agent's experience. Furthermore, lived experience is 
an 
attractive 
and 
trustworthy 
methodological 
passageway into the consciousness of an individual 
and hence to insight into the process of human 
inquiry. It makes it possible to understand the 
everyday lives of individuals more carefully and 
attentively without any preconceived notions and 
views. This requires researchers to be open to their 
own experiences and to the experiences of others and, 
in so doing, to set aside dogmatic arguments and 
opinions. The experience becomes a passageway with 
which to access data that awaken researchers to a 
deeper level of understanding in their own practice of 
how to live authentically with themselves, their 
colleagues and learners. In the words of Kierkegaard 
(cited in Carson, 1992, p. 105), lived experience is a 
form of "remembering forward" and understanding 
how the process of knowledge acquisition unfolds. In 
other words, life can only be understood backwards, 
and the lessons learned from the past are often carried 
into the future. In other types of research frameworks 
and methodologies, such as ethnography, case studies 
and surveys, the research can become impersonal. 
Researchers often fragment and abstract teachers' and 
learners' experiences in such a way that their 
experiences become incomprehensible. In this regard, 
Van Manen (cited in Brown, 1992) asks: "Is it ever 
possible to observe a child's [teacher's] experiences 
in a pure way?" (p. 47). In most studies, researchers 
illuminate some aspects of teaching, but at the cost of 
discussing their significance in isolation, divorced 
from the lives of teachers and learners. As Brown 
(1992, p. 44) points out, it makes no sense to sever 
experiences 
from 
their 
highly 
complex 
and 
interwoven context. 
 
Phenomenological researchers are expected to take a 
transcendental leap into the minds of the participants 
in order to view their experiences as data. Since 
phenomenology is an act of doing, the novice 
researcher in this field has difficulty understanding it 
as a philosophy. Husserl (1929/1975) reiterates that 
one cannot understand his philosophy by merely 
reading it. Phenomenology is about doing. Eagleton 
(1983) explains how Husserl (1936/1970) saw Europe 
lying in ruins as the result of an uncritical acceptance 
of objectivistic and natural views of knowledge. This 
crisis highlights the inability of natural science to 
consider how the subjectivity of the researcher 
inevitably participates in the constitution of scientific 
knowledge. Phenomenology aims to reveal this 
participation by describing the essential correlations 
between any intentional act of consciousness and the 
corresponding intended object of experience. Husserl 
believes that the natural scientist has lost touch with 
the lived world of experience, fails to grasp the 
connection 
between 
scientific 
knowledge 
and 
everyday experience, and erroneously presupposes 
that the lived world has an ontological foundation. 
 
Conclusion 
 
This paper has outlined the author's journey and 
tireless efforts to grasp the conceptual field of 
phenomenology in all its complexity. His journey 
shows why it is important that novice researchers in 
the field of phenomenology must first become well 
acquainted with the theoretical framework and its 
complex methodology before applying it. The paper 
also indicates how novices might enter into the 
lifeworld of teachers and remain open and attuned to 
the complexity and unpredictability of their inner 
lives. From this standpoint, the paper stresses the 
importance of returning to lived experience to lay 
bare human consciousness in order to represent the 
lives of teachers as accurately as possible. It points 
out how phenomenology embraces the common 
features of the essence of human experience and 
views experience and behaviour as being locked in an 
integral and inseparable relationship (Moustakas, 
1994, p. 8). In this regard, phenomenology focuses on 
the structure and the variations of the structure of 
consciousness (Giorgi, 1989). It provides a theoretical 
description of lived experience as revealed primarily 
through the consciousness of an individual, without 
any intention to justify, explain or interpret the 
experience. 
 
Husserl (1929/1975, 1925/1977) has shown that, as a 
research methodology, phenomenology is rigorous 
and intellectually precise in that it allows the data to 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology  
Volume 15, Edition 1  
 May 2015 
 
Page 8 of 10 
 
 
© The Author(s). This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0]. 
The IPJP is published in association with NISC (Pty) Ltd and Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
www.ipjp.org 
 
flow freely from the research participant to disclose 
the immediate consciousness from which the structure 
of experience and the fundamental epistemological 
facts about a phenomenon derive. By bracketing out 
the researcher's dogmatic beliefs, judgements and 
preconceived ideas, the unadulterated apprehension of 
experience is made possible and allows the researcher 
to perceive the uniqueness of the individual. 
Husserlian phenomenology has great potential for 
elucidating science education, insofar as Husserl's 
methodology articulates a scrupulous commitment to 
the research participant's voice in educing the 
meaning that expresses our essential existence as 
human beings. This paper explains why this is so and 
builds a case for its value in science education. 
 
In closing, it is fitting to recount Van Manen's 
parable (as cited by Brown, 1992, p. 59) describing 
how two persons, one a passer-by and the other a 
teacher on playground duty, observe a girl skipping. 
As the passer-by reviews the scene in his mind's eye, 
he sees himself skipping, which takes him back to his 
life as a learner. He experiences a sense of regret and 
loss linked to a yearning for his school days. He, 
however, quickly realises that those days are gone, 
slips back into his present reality, and continues his 
journey. Van Manen next describes the same girl 
skipping as seen through the eyes of the teacher. The 
teacher also experiences regret and sadness, but for a 
different reason. He feels this way because he knows 
the child. In every skip, he senses the deep anguish 
and loneliness of the child, caused by an over-
demanding mother. 
 
Significantly, although both individuals saw the child, 
only the teacher saw the real person. The passer-by 
saw his own past, but the teacher saw the needs of the 
child. It is, therefore,  possible for a researcher to see 
his or her subjects and yet to fail to see the depth of 
the humanity embedded in their consciousness. 
 
 
 
 
 
Referencing Format 
 
Koopman, O. (2015). Phenomenology as a potential methodology for subjective knowing in science education 
research. Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology, 15(1), 10 pp. doi: 10.1080/20797222.2015.1049898 
 
 
 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
I wish to thank the anonymous reviewers for offering helpful comments on an earlier draft of this paper. I also thank 
Lesley Le Grange and Karen de Mink for acting as critical friends. 
 
 
 
 
 
About the Author 
 
 
Oscar Koopman 
Faculty of Education 
Cape Peninsula University of Technology, South Africa 
E-mail address:  koopmano@cput.ac.za 
 
 
Dr Oscar Koopman is a lecturer in Chemistry in the Faculty of Education at the Cape 
Peninsula University of Technology in Cape Town, South Africa. He completed his PhD 
at Stellenbosch University and his areas of research interest include science education and 
phenomenology. 
 
 
 
 
 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology  
Volume 15, Edition 1  
 May 2015 
 
Page 9 of 10 
 
 
© The Author(s). This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0]. 
The IPJP is published in association with NISC (Pty) Ltd and Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
www.ipjp.org 
 
References 
 
Brown, R. K. (1992). Max van Manen and pedagogical human science research. In W. F. Pinar & W. M. Reynolds 
(Eds.), Understanding curriculum as phenomenological and deconstructed text (pp. 44-63). New York, NY: 
Teachers College Press. 
 
Carr, W. (2006). Philosophy, methodology and action research. Journal of Philosophy of Education, 40(4), 421-435. 
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9752.2006.00535.x 
 
Carson, T. (1992). Remembering forward: Reflections on educating for peace. In W. F. Pinar & W. M. Reynolds 
(Eds.), Understanding curriculum as phenomenological and deconstructed text (pp. 102-115). New York, NY: 
Teachers College Press. 
 
Derrida, J. (1978). Writing and difference (A. Bass, Trans.). London, UK: Routledge & Kegan Paul. (Original work 
published 1967) 
 
Devenish, S. (2002). An applied method for undertaking phenomenological explication of interview transcripts. 
Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology, 2(1), 1-20. 
 
Eagleton, T. (1983). Literary theory: An introduction. Oxford, UK: Basil Blackwell. 
 
Finlay, L. (2012). Unfolding the phenomenological research process: Iterative stages of "seeing afresh". Journal of 
Behavioural Psychology, 53(2), 172-201. doi: 10.1177/0022167812453877 
 
Gadamer, H. G. (1975). Truth and method (G. Barden & J. Cumming, Trans.). New York, NY: Seabury Press. 
(Original work published 1960) 
 
Giorgi, A. (1989). An example of harmony between descriptive reports and behaviour. Journal of Phenomenological 
Psychology, 20(1), 60-88. 
 
Groenewald, T. (2004). A phenomenological research design illustrated. International Journal of Qualitative 
Methods, 3(1), 1-27. 
 
Heidegger, M. (1967). Being and time (J. Macquarrie & E. Robinson, Trans.). Oxford, UK: Basil Blackwell. 
(Original work published 1926) 
 
Heidegger, M. (2002). The essence of truth: On Plato's cave allegory and Theaetetus (T. Sadler, Trans.). London, 
UK: Continuum. (Original work published 1932) 
 
Husserl, E. (1970). The crisis of the European sciences and transcendental phenomenology: An introduction to 
phenomenological philosophy (D. Carr, Trans.). Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press. (Original work 
published 1936) 
 
Husserl, E. (1975). The Paris lectures (2nd ed.) (P. Koestenbaum, Trans.). The Hague, Netherlands: Martinus 
Nijhoff. (Original lectures delivered 1929 and published posthumously 1950) 
 
Husserl, E. (1977). Phenomenological psychology: Lectures, summer semester 1925 (J. Scanlon, Trans.). The Hague, 
Netherlands: Martinus Njihoff. (Original work published posthumously 1962) 
 
Husserl, E. (1983). Ideas pertaining to a pure phenomenology and to a phenomenological philosophy. First Book: 
General introduction to a pure phenomenology (F. Kersten, Trans.). The Hague, Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff. 
(Original work published 1913) 
 
Husserl, E. (1997). Thing and space: Lectures of 1907 (R. Rojcewicz, Trans.). Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer 
Academic Publishers. (Original work edited by U. Claesges published posthumously 1964) 
 
Husserl, E. (2001). Logical investigations (Vol. 2) (J. N. Findlay, Trans.). London, UK: Routledge. (Original work 
published 1901) 
 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology  
Volume 15, Edition 1  
 May 2015 
 
Page 10 of 10 
 
 
© The Author(s). This Open Access article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons License [CC BY-NC-ND 4.0]. 
The IPJP is published in association with NISC (Pty) Ltd and Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. 
www.ipjp.org 
 
Hycner, R. H. (1985). Some guidelines for the phenomenological analysis of interview data. Human Studies, 8(3), 
279-303. 
 
Koestenbaum, P. (1975). Introductory essay. In E. Husserl, The Paris lectures (2nd ed.) (P. Koestenbaum, Trans.) 
(pp. ix - lxxvii). The Hague, Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff. (Original translation and introduction published 
1961) 
 
Levering, B. (2006). Epistemological issues in phenomenological research: How authoritative are people's accounts 
of their own perceptions? Journal of Philosophy of Education, 40(4), 451-462. 
 
Locke, J. (2009). Of the abuse of words. London, UK: Penguin Books. (Original work published 1689) 
 
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1962). Phenomenology of perception (C. Smith, Trans.). London, UK: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
(Original work published 1945) 
 
Moustakas, C. (1994). Phenomenological research methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 
Sartre, J. P. (1956). Being and nothingness (H. E. Barnes, Trans.). New York, NY: Washington Square Press. 
(Original work published 1943) 
 
Spanos, W. V. (1976). Heidegger, Kierkegaard and the hermeneutic circle: Towards a postmodern theory of 
interpretation as dis-closure. Boundary, 4(2), 455-488. 
 
Van Manen, M. (1990). Researching lived experience: Human science for an action sensitive pedagogy. London, UK: 
Althouse Press. 
 
Van Manen, M. (2007). Phenomenology of practice. Phenomenology & Practice, 1(1), 11-30. 
 
Willis, P. (2002). Don't call it poetry. Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology, 2(1), 1-14. 
 
 
 
_______________________________ 
 

