Comparative and Continental Philosophy
ISSN: 1757-0638 (Print) 1757-0646 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/yccp20
Simone Weil's Phenomenology of the Body
Lissa McCullough
To cite this article: Lissa McCullough (2012) Simone Weil's Phenomenology of
the Body, Comparative and Continental Philosophy, 4:2, 195-218, DOI: 10.1179/
ccp.4.2.y05283778236305l
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1179/ccp.4.2.y05283778236305l
Published online: 21 Apr 2015.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 382
View related articles 
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=yccp20

© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2013, Unit S3, Kelham House, 3 Lancaster Street, Sheffield S3 8AF
CCP 4.2 (2012) 195-218	
Comparative and Continental Philosophy    (print) ISSN 1757-0638 
	
	
Comparative and Continental Philosophy  (online) ISSN 1757-0646 
Simone Weil's Phenomenology of the Body
LISSA McCULLOUGH 
lissa.mccullough@gmail.com
ABSTRACT
Major thinkers of the twentieth-century (Husserl, Heidegger, Wittgenstein, 
Whitehead) explored the conditions for the possibility of perception, lan­
guage, and thought, and Merleau-Ponty in particular addressed the physi­
cal body as a condition of existing and being situated in the world. Although 
French philosopher Simone Weil (1909-1943) has not been recognized as 
belonging in this stream of philosophical history, this article seeks to dem­
onstrate that Weil was a pioneering phenomenologist of the body; for re­
markably like Merleau-Ponty—yet more than a decade before him in the 
early 1930s—Simone Weil's thinking centered on the foundational role of 
the body in structuring thought and ordering the world. The body is the first 
and primary orderer of experience for Weil: it grasps relations intuitively, 
pre-linguistically, and mediates action and thought. Weil's body-thinking 
reconfigures the basis of thinking itself, positing that bodily movement is the 
factor sine qua non that enables ordered spatial-temporal perception, a per­
ception on which the most abstract reaches of language and thought depend.
Keywords
Simone Weil, phenomenology, body, Merleau-Ponty, Cartesianism
The most fundamental philosophical thinking of the twentieth century explored 
the conditions for the possibility of perception, language, and thought—an ave­
nue of inquiry that inherently tends in a holistic direction. As part of this task, 
the past century's major thinkers, including Husserl, Heidegger, Wittgenstein, 
and Whitehead, addressed the physical body as a condition of our existing and 
being situated in the world. Yet it is arguable that their efforts to think the body 

196	
Lissa McCullough
© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2013
were fragmentary or insufficiently thoroughgoing, and that a truly foundational 
and sustained examination of the body's centrality in philosophy emerged only 
at mid-century with the phenomenology of perception of Maurice Merleau-
Ponty.1 To my knowledge, the French philosopher Simone Weil (1909-1943) 
has never been recognized as belonging within this stream of philosophical his­
tory. This is in part because her earliest writings—the ones that most explicitly 
and systematically develop her body-thinking—are infrequently read relative 
to her later essays and notebooks. This is also in part because the foundational 
nature of Weil's body-thinking has not been recognized even among Weil schol­
ars, who acknowledge the body as a major theme of her thinking but do not 
recognize how the body in Weil—as in Merleau-Ponty—reconfigures the very 
basis and origination of thinking itself. 
The present argument seeks to demonstrate that Weil was a pioneering phe­
nomenologist of the body, for remarkably like Merleau-Ponty—but beginning 
a decade and a half before him in 1930—Simone Weil's thinking centered on 
the foundational or axial role of the body in structuring thought and ordering 
the world. Her early work posits that movement, whether literal bodily move­
ment or imitative movement of the imagination, is the factor sine qua non that 
enables spatial-temporal perception, a perception on which the most abstract 
reaches of language and thought depend. The body is the first and primary 
orderer of experience for Weil; it grasps relations intuitively, pre-linguistically, 
and mediates world-ordering perceptions with mind-ordering conceptions—or 
action with thought. "The body classifies things in the world before there is any 
thought...So, when we are on the point of giving birth to thought, it comes to 
birth in a world that already is ordered" (LP 31, 32). 
As we shall see, Weil maintains in Kantian fashion that perception is active 
construal of sensation by the imagination into articulate order, delineating 
space, distance, shape, position, and time; for "in nature, order does not exist" 
(LP 84). But here Weil points to the body as the organ and agent of imagina­
tion in a way that Kant only hinted at in a couple of pre-critical essays. Bodily 
movement provides the master key of our perception, for the relationships we 
perceive in the world are really "a disposition to act in a certain way" (LP 49). 
Movement of the body—or movement of the imagination in imitation of bod­
ily movement—is what first constructs an environ accessible to thought, hence 
all thought is dependent on bodily learning. Our purpose will be to trace key 
moments of Weil's body-thinking from its first elaboration in her dissertation, 
1.	
Taylor Carmen convincingly illustrates how much more axial the body becomes in Mer­
leau-Ponty as compared to in Husserl (Carmen 1999). 

Simone Weil's Phenomenology of the Body	
197
© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2013
Science and Perception in Descartes of 1930, through her lectures on philosophy 
of 1933-1934, then her later notebooks and essays. 
Weil's Early Deconstruction of Descartes
The subject-object bifurcation that has tenaciously characterized modern 
thought has had its primary ground in Descartes' diremption of mind and body, 
extension and thought. As Whitehead described it, post-Cartesian philosophy 
has oscillated in a complex manner between three extremes: "There are the 
dualists, who accept matter and mind as on an equal basis, and the two varieties 
of monists, those who put mind inside matter, and those who put matter inside 
mind" (Whitehead 1925, 55). Whitehead himself viewed this state of affairs 
as a disaster of abstraction, the result of what he calls the fallacy of misplaced 
concreteness (52, 58).2 Abstraction per se is not the problem, but the misap­
plication of it: the naive tendency to ascribe abstractions to the world directly 
rather than viewing them as simplifications and manipulations of the world as 
it is modeled by our minds. 
It is a bit ironic, then, that Weil's key inspiration in her earliest thinking on the 
body is Descartes—though to be precise the inspiration is Descartes' method 
of doubting, for, as she puts it later, "doubt is a virtue of the intelligence" (FLN 
207). The purpose of Weil's Cartesian thought-experiment in her 1930 disserta­
tion, Science and Perception in Descartes, differs markedly from that of Descartes 
in his Meditations three centuries earlier. Descartes' prime objective in the con­
text of early modern Europe, shaken to its foundations by internecine religious 
strife, was to secure an indubitable ground for noetic certitude. Weil's aim is 
naturally different; writing as a 21-year-old syndicalist, hers is an intellectually 
democratic ambition to illustrate that all ordinary people, however ignorant 
of scientific thought they may be, already employ the most fundamental and 
essential principles of science in their ordinary perception and daily work with­
out being aware of it. 
Weil's objective is to denude the scientist-expert of mystifying authority—an 
authority that reigned with quasi-priestly power in 1930s France—by revealing 
the roots of scientific method in the principles that govern ordinary human per­
ception and action. The principal argument of her dissertation is that, although 
major modern philosophers have depreciated perception as the lowest form of 
knowledge, it is in fact "of the same nature as science itself " (FW 53 and pas­
sim). She believes that if this were widely recognized, both ordinary people and 
scientific inquiry would benefit from this democratizing awareness.
2.	
Husserl offers a very similar assessment in his The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcen­
dental Phenomenology published in 1936; see also Edward S. Casey 1997, 220-221.

198	
Lissa McCullough
© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2013
To make this case she posits a "fictitious thinker" who proceeds by the Car­
tesian method of doubting. To be a Cartesian, she posits, is "to doubt every­
thing, and then to examine everything in order, without believing in anything 
except one's own thought insofar as it is clear and distinct, and without trusting 
the authority of anyone" (FW 54). This method allows her to begin phenom­
enologically with an emptied hypothetical subject, a human tabula rasa, who 
knows nothing about herself or the world, presupposes nothing, and is imme­
diately constituted by sensation alone. Weil begins phenomenologically with 
the awareness that "I am in the world; that is, I feel that I am subject to some 
external thing that I feel is more or less subject to me" (FW 55). 
Weil's 1930 experiment already diverges fundamentally from Descartes' in 
that she takes sensation, with its mixed coincidence of pleasure and pain, to be 
more immediate, intimate, and irreducible than Descartes' theoretical dubito, 
which is a dependent, second-order phenomenon in Weil's analysis. Whereas 
Descartes employs pure thinking—divorced from extension and "independ­
ent" of it—to doubt the body, sensation, movement, and place as chimeras, 
Weil maintains that pure sensation, qua immediacy, cannot be doubted.3 To 
doubt is to introduce a division and redoubling between immediacy and the 
questioning of that immediacy, whereas sensation as such is pure immediacy 
and nothing else; as Hegel characterizes it, it is a Tiergarten [zoological-garden] 
consciousness, a pure immediacy that we can imagine hypothetically but can 
never consciously attain.4
Concerning the irreducibility of sensation, Weil's later notebooks identify 
an alternative to Descartes' theoretical (mind-based) model of doubting in the 
practical (body-based) one of the Tibetan monk Milarepa, who demonstrates 
the reality of the sensible world through fasting: 
After having destroyed to the utmost the reality of the universe, he finally 
reached its irreducible point, the point where the very mind which conceives 
finds itself degraded to being one out of the number of appearances. Food con­
stitutes this point. Food is the irreducible element. Fasting constitutes an experi­
3.	
Descartes' thinker declares early in the Second Meditation: "I am supposing, then, that all 
the things that I see are false. I believe that none of the things that the mendacious memory 
represents has ever existed. I have no senses at all. Body, figure, extension, movement and 
place are chimeras." He goes on to ask: "Am I not so bound to the body and to the senses 
that I could not be without them?" and proceeds to answer the question decisively, "I am, 
I exist" as a thinking substance independent from extension (Descartes 1990, 99, 101). 
4.	
Hegel supposes that before human beings become capable of self-conscious judgment, 
which means a diremption or dividedness of consciousness, they exist in an animal state. 
Adam and Eve before the fall are the image of this pure immediacy and their "paradise is in 
fact initially a zoological garden [Tiergarten]" (Hegel 1988, 214). 

Simone Weil's Phenomenology of the Body	
199
© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2013
mental knowledge of the irreducible character of food, and hence of the reality 
of the sensible universe. (N 316)
A brief Weil article of 1941 likewise insists it is a "meaningless problem" to 
question the existence of objective reality for the reason that, given along with 
our most immediate sensation is the sensation of being opposed by something 
outside ourselves, external and foreign: "a reality outside ourselves is given at the 
same time as our own; it is just as impossible to reject [as our own reality], and 
we continually experience it" (FW 288). 
In the beginning of human experience, Weil proposes, there is the sensorium 
from whose sensate chaos of mixed pleasure-pain responses all else in human 
existence arises: consciousness, action, order, language, thought, and eventually 
the "world" construct. With regard to the latter, though, we do well to keep 
aware of our assumptions when using the term "world"—as Weil herself does 
not—for as intellectual historian Rémi Brague has noted, "humanity was able 
to do without the idea of 'world' for half of its history—not to mention the 
immensity of prehistory" (Brague 2003, 11). Explicitly having a world, Brague 
argues, was a creation of the Axial Age, and the reflexive notion of living in a 
world, kosmos, developed only gradually within ancient Greek culture; it did 
not previously exist in the ancient Near East or Far East (11, 17-25). He fur­
ther asserts that ancient Greek scientists were aware that their use of the term 
kosmos had "essentially constructed the kosmos as such" (23).
Questions concerning the nature of what one is sensing—whether it is real 
or illusory, divine or profane, whether it can have a causal explanation, whether 
it has limits or laws—cannot arise unless the immediacy of sensation is given 
as the ground and generative matrix of the dubito. For the dubito, to arise at 
all, requires something to doubt. The fictitious thinker in Weil's dissertation 
continues: 
This feeling with its shadings of pleasure and pain, which is the only thing I 
can experience,...is all that I can say about the world. I cannot say, "This thorn 
hurts my finger," or even, "I have hurt my finger," or even, "I feel pain." As soon 
as I give a name to what I feel, I am saying...more than I can know. These things 
that are so intimately present to me are so only through the presence of this 
feeling that is inseparable from my very existence, which is revealed to me solely 
through them. (FW 56)
This sentient "I" is unselfconscious, a creature of the Tiergarten; it constitutes 
itself by thoughtlessly discerning form within sensation as a matter of bodily 
reflex. It ascribes form automatically in response to pleasure-pain motives that 
distinguish types of sensation for it:

200	
Lissa McCullough
© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2013
Appearances are impenetrable insofar as they make present to me the feeling 
that creates out of them the density, the bittersweetness of my own existence. 
For this savor is mine, but it is not something I have created. If nothing in me 
were alien to me, my thinking would be uncontaminated by pleasure and pain. 
But insofar as this impenetrable thing is clear and defined for me, insofar as it 
manifests itself to me, it takes its form from me. (FW 57)
The form-ascribing sensorium of Weil's hypothetical subject exists without 
the reflexive thought that it exists. Ideas occur to it and impose their ways on the 
sensing subject, ideas that assist in lending form to sensation, and yet the subject 
is passive to their spontaneous appearance and rule. "What I call the world of 
ideas is no less chaos than the world of sensations... Nothing that transpires in 
my consciousness has any reality other than the consciousness that I have of it" 
(FW 57). Weil's hypothetical subject gains nothing by moving from the sensible 
plane to the intelligible plane of ideas because both planes are equally bound by 
chance; that is, by the fact that whatever occurs to it occurs simply as a given, 
a datum. "I am never conscious of anything except the trappings of chance...
There is nothing else" (FW 58).
Or is there something else? The subject's first step as a thinker is to realize: 
I register whatever occurs to me in the form of thinking, and the things that 
I think have me in their power; so it happens that the only thing they borrow 
from me is belief, or my credence. Credence is the one thing I can withhold, and 
this withholding is the only power I have over them. "The power that I exercise 
over my own belief is not an illusion... And through this power of thinking—
which so far is revealed to me only by the power of doubting—I know that I am. 
I have power, therefore I am [Je puis, donc je suis]" (FW 59). 
Although the thinker's power over her belief is a negative one, it results in 
a positive capacity to act, to be active. "My own existence as I feel it is an illu­
sion; but my existence as I know it is not a feeling but my creation...To know 
is to know what I can do" (FW 59). The act of doubting actually "causes me to 
exist" (FW 67). Consciousness of my existence, or the certain knowledge that 
I exist, derives from this negative power, which, when exercised, creates a realm 
of freedom heterogeneous to the happenstance realms of sensation and random 
thought. Desires, passions, sensations, and random ideas cannot prove my exist­
ence except insofar as I think them, taking possession of them in the realm of my 
freedom. Je puis is thus the wellsprings and origin of je suis.
As long as I continue to suspend my credence, my sovereignty over myself is 
absolute, but it disappears as soon as I give myself something positive to think; 
I am free only as long as I remain disengaged. Because no power is limited by 
itself, the fact that my freedom can disappear in this way reveals to me that my 

Simone Weil's Phenomenology of the Body	
201
© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2013
power is not absolute and that my existence is not the only existence. In tandem 
with discovering my negative power, I discover an obstacle which limits it. The 
self-knowledge that is born of my power to withhold belief (i.e., to doubt) gives 
rise concomitantly to knowledge of an existence that is not myself. The correla­
tion of my power and the obstacle it meets give me knowledge of self and non-
self (or other existence) simultaneously. 
Although I cannot create a single one of my thoughts, all of them . . . are, to the 
extent that they are subject to me, signs of myself; to the extent that they are 
not subject to me, signs of the other existence [l'autre existence]. To know is to 
read this double meaning in any thought; it is to make the obstacle appear in a 
thought, while recognizing in that thought my own power. (FW 63)
Weil's thinker thus realizes that becoming knowledgeable and achieving self-
mastery are the same thing: I can learn only from the exercise of my power. I 
am able to know by reading in the feeling of my own existence only the obstacle 
submitted to and overcome. To learn to know my own power is simply to learn 
to exercise it. But concomitant with knowing my power is knowing that it is 
limited. I remain impenetrable to myself insofar as I do not create myself by 
the act of thinking, that is, to the extent that I remain passively subject to the 
imprint of my environ. I do not have sovereign power over my thoughts; they 
present themselves to me as so many obstacles and I am only their arbiter. The 
one thing that is truly mine is my judgment. Although I have no power to shape 
the feelings and ideas that take hold of me, as obstacles they allow me a kind of 
grasp of my surround; through them my judgment impinges on all that is "other 
existence." 
Doubting can thus suspend the imperious power of chaotic tumult, but in 
order to be able to make use of it to learn and gain control, what is necessary is 
to apply the negative power of judgment to the fortuitous furnishings of imagi­
nation and sensation. Rather than suspend the imagination, then, "I must give 
it free rein so that I may learn from it" (FW 71). Sense impressions, which make 
me subject to other existence, cannot teach me how to take hold of my power; 
nor can my understanding instruct itself in how to use this power. I can control 
it only by actually exercising it vis-à-vis the obstacle; therefore "I will go to this 
third ambiguous being that is a composite of myself and the world acting on 
each other," the point of intersection between matter and mind, the bond of 
action and reaction between the world and my thought (FW 69). Weil names 
this bond imagination [imagination] and distinguishes it from understanding 
[entendement], which thinks in negative freedom from the world, and sensi­
bility [sensibilité], which is passively subject to the world. Imagination is the 
middle third that mediates the latter two; without this mediation, "I would 

202	
Lissa McCullough
© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2013
be always like a spectator at a badly staged play in which the storm, riot, or 
battle is represented in a ludicrous way" (FW 70). In other words, I would be 
the dysfunctional embodiment of a pure Cartesian dualism: an absurd marriage 
of sensibility and understanding in permanent disengagement and disjunction 
from each other. 
This identifies the point at which Cartesian dualism reveals its artificiality. In 
reality, extraneous sense impressions continually impinge upon and disturb con­
sciousness without relief. I cannot for a moment take myself to be pure mind, 
pure dubito. "The world and my mind are so thoroughly intermingled that, if I 
think that I conceive one of the two separately, I attribute to it what belongs to 
the other" (FW 70). The environ has an ineluctable grip on me, for "far from 
being an understanding to which senses have been added like telephone opera­
tors to a staff headquarters, I am first and foremost nothing but imagination" 
(ibid.). To be imagination first and foremost is to originate as an interfused and 
indistinguishable chaos of "other existence" and consciousness. 
Although Weil continues to employ the categories of a Cartesian-style duality 
between mind's activity and sensibility's passivity, her centering of the subject 
in imagination prevents that duality of categories from ever being a true dual­
ism between non-identical substances (extensio and cogitatio) as they are for 
Descartes. To the contrary, imagination is the mixed chaos from which the dis­
tinction between sensation and thought emerges: "The imagination...guided 
by the mind, opens a passageway into the world for thought" (FW 72-73). All 
the while, imagination remains the ground of their substantial union and rec­
onciliation. This is a deeply consequential divergence from Descartes, for whose 
cogito the imagination is inessential and dispensable.5
But in itself, imagination is not able to reconcile sensation and thought 
effectively. Imagination constitutes the grasp I have on the surround, the cor­
respondence between a thought of mine and a sensory change outside me. But 
this correspondence is not itself an act; it is that which can be utilized in order 
to act. Action alone creates an obstacle, hence there is no possibility of action 
on the part of the mind as long as it is dominated by the imagination. The one 
thing that can do this is concerted bodily action, or work (FW 78). The active 
locus of intersection is therefore the body, my body, which is my "first tool" 
(FW 81). The body is the instrument that actively engages mind with its obsta­
cle in the form of work: 
5.	
Descartes' cogito states, "I consider that this power of imagining which is in me, in so far as it 
differs from the power of understanding, is not required for the essence of me myself, that is, 
for the essence of my mind. For although the power of imagining were absent from me, I would 
without doubt remain nonetheless that same one who I am now" (Descartes 1990, 187). 

Simone Weil's Phenomenology of the Body	
203
© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2013
Instead of taking [sense] impressions as signs of fantastic beings, I can take them 
merely as intermediaries for grasping my own work, or rather the object of my 
work: the obstacle, extension. This is what perception consists of, as can be seen 
by the famous example of the blind man's stick. The blind man does not feel 
the different pressures of the stick on his hand; he touches things directly with 
his stick, as if it were sensible and formed part of his body . . . For each of us the 
blind man's stick is simply his own body. The human body is like a pincer for the 
mind to grasp and handle [saisir et palper] the world. (FW 79)
The body, in work, eliminates the random play of imagination and delineates 
an order in the world by means of action. Weil proposes, moreover, that this 
order is inherently geometrical. Geometry is imbedded in the perceptual imagi­
nation and in the motions of the body alike, such that effective work is always 
based on methodical recombinations of the simple idea of straight-line move­
ment (the simplest movement of thought that can be traced out by the imagina­
tion). The body acts according to the same geometrical order that the imagina­
tion employs to perceive and structure the world. This cooperation of passive 
(imaginative) and active (bodily) movement takes possession of the world by 
turning it into an obstacle. This is the work of the imaginative body, for Weil 
finally concedes that body and imagination are one: "It appears that there is no 
contradiction involved in reducing the imagination to the human body, and 
in making it the only instrument of knowledge for everything concerning the 
world" (FW 87). 
Weil in Context of the 1930s
Weil revisits the relationship between bodily motion and perception in her lec­
tures on philosophy of 1933-1934 given at a girls' lycée at Roanne, providing 
her body-thinking a fuller grounding. Bearing in mind that these lectures are 
transcribed from a student's careful notes, and are not Weil's own writing, the 
lectures nonetheless reaffirm that the senses work only in a passive way. Apart 
from movement, the senses present us with an infinite variety of sensations 
that teach us nothing at all about the world (LP 43, 47). Every sensible particle 
of color, for example, is absolutely different from every other sensible particle 
of color; there is no red or blue, for these are quantitative classifications con­
structed by movement along an imagined color continuum. In fact, sensation 
itself is an abstraction from normal perception: "Far from sensation being the 
only thing that is immediately given to us, it is, as such, only given to us by an 
effort of abstraction, and by a great effort at that" (LP 47). 
Since we do perceive our world, Weil infers that what is given us in perception 
is more than simply sensation. Perception is rather construal of sensation by the 

204	
Lissa McCullough
© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2013
imagination. In isolating objects or separate parts of an object, it is not our eyes 
that make the distinction but the movement of our imagination. Distance does 
not exist for sight without movement, nor do objects have a shape for sight: "it 
is impossible to have the idea of shape without the idea of movement; a straight 
line or a curve is something which one scans" by means of a movement of the 
eyes, a finger, a pencil, or the imagination (LP 41). This movement does not 
belong to visual data themselves. Likewise, touch, when it is passive, without 
movement, provides us with neither distances nor shapes: "space does not exist 
for touch in so far as it is passive" (LP 43). 
A similar analysis applies to the remaining senses: a sound, scent, or taste, 
inasmuch as it is a pure sense datum, does not belong to the cause of the sound, 
scent, or taste, but inexplicably registers on the sense organ from nowhere. Only 
a movement of the imagination associates the sense datum with its cause. " One 
cannot distinguish a sensation until one has related it to an object" (LP 45). 
Weil adds that although sense data can have durée in Henri Bergson's technical 
sense—that is, an experiential continuity—these sensations do not involve time 
but remain a thing of the present. For sensations to be able to give us the idea of 
time we have to be able to attach some significance to past sensations, and we do 
that precisely by relating them to objects. Only when the imagination organizes 
sensations into a perceptual order are they associated with space or the passage 
of time. Considered in themselves, "sensations tell us nothing about the world; 
they contain neither matter, space, time, and they give us nothing outside of 
themselves" (LP 47).
The body plays a central role in creating this perceptual order because the 
reflex reactions of the body are what reduce the infinite variety of sensations to a 
limited number. These bodily reflexes can be either congenital or acquired, con­
sciously or unconsciously conditioned. Stimuli are infinite in number, but our 
reactions to them are limited; "by means of our reactions we generalize stimuli" 
(LP 30). Life would be impossible if our bodies did not do this automatically, 
both by instinct and conditioning, as otherwise every stimulus would call forth 
a unique, once in a lifetime response, producing a sort of behavioral chaos. In 
fact, feelings, in Weil's analysis, are nothing other than complex conjunctions of 
these bodily responses: "The bodily movements which make up feelings are all 
in fact either instincts, natural reflexes or conditioned reflexes, or a combina­
tion of all these" (LP 40).
Thus it happens that, "from the very fact that we have a body, the world is 
ordered for it; it is arranged in order in relation to the body's reactions" (LP 
31). Things perceived as a whole have an effect on our bodies, not things in 
the infinitude of their particularity. The body primarily grasps wholes in rela­

Simone Weil's Phenomenology of the Body	
205
© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2013
tionship to other wholes, rather than atomic details that would distract from 
those relationships. Exceptional states of consciousness, such as schizophrenia 
and drug-induced hallucination, may underscore this general rule, since these 
exceptional states often involve abnormally heightened attention to sensual-
perceptual detail at the expense of primary perception of familiar wholes in 
relationship. Because the body makes generalizations as a matter of instinctive 
or trained reflex, when we are "on the point of giving birth to thought," it comes 
to birth in a world already ordered (LP 32). This order delineated by the body 
is a precondition of thought, not a result of thought, as Peter Winch notes in his 
introduction (LP 13). 
So we see that imagination and body are allied in Weil's thought to the point 
of explicit identity. Unfortunately, she does not analyze this identity more sys­
tematically, and moreover, she often falls back into the habits of Cartesian lan­
guage, writing of them in turn as though they were distinct, when she herself 
has clearly argued otherwise. But we should make the most of her bold affirma­
tion that there seems to be "no contradiction involved in reducing the imagina­
tion to the human body, and in making it the only instrument of knowledge for 
everything concerning the world" (FW 87). In light of this radical claim for the 
foundational role of the body in knowledge, it would seem justifiable for us to 
concoct a hyphenated term for this identity: the body-imagination. Though we 
cannot proceed to say much more about it without moving beyond Weil's anal­
ysis into our own, in any case it is clear that the body-imagination rather than 
the sensorium per se is what effectively construes all perception of the world: 
One is conscious of what one believes one sees, and not of what one sees, of 
what one believes one touches, and not of what one touches, etc. Sensation only 
serves as an occasion for becoming conscious of what one believes one feels...
The source of the identity of objects is in the imagination alone. (LP 48-49) 
To illustrate she cites the example of a cubic image drawn on a two dimen­
sional surface. One really "sees" something spatial. What causes this impression 
of space, which, as long as I remain in the illusion, is not essentially different 
from real space occupied by a real cube? The cubic space envisioned is the result 
of my gesture of grasping the object; the space I imagine it to fill is a relation­
ship between the sensations and myself, consisting of my disposition to act in 
a certain way. All the spatial relations we perceive are similarly dispositions to 
act in a certain way in response to our sensations, which is why "all spaces, even 
those over which we do not travel, make us want to do so" (LP 49). Weil pro­
poses that this is the attraction of great architecture and of natural scenery as 
well: it induces the body-imagination to survey it, desire to travel it, and thus 
possess it in gesture. 

206	
Lissa McCullough
© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2013
For another example, Weil cites a lamp fixture on the ceiling. We say that it is 
circular in shape despite the fact that what we see is an ellipse. An ellipse is on 
our retina, but we do not see it as such. Objects assume what we call their real 
shape through the movement of our imagination, and that "real" shape is the 
shape that appears to us when the object occupies the whole of our visual field. 
In fact the full circular view is not "more real" than the many elliptical views; it 
is our imagination that prefers the circle as geometrically the simplest and there­
fore the most essential account of the lamp's shape. Similarly, "all the lines that 
form the limits of things, which make up their shapes, are given to us through 
our reflexes, by our own movement" (LP 51). 
Thus we "describe" things with our thought in order to perceive them, much 
as a geometer "describes" a circle. But our descriptions are not a matter of arbi­
trary fantasy. What they are, in Weil's view, is elementary geometry, a geometry 
governed by necessary relationships of form. Such necessary relationships are 
reflected in the fact that we cannot look at three points on a surface without 
seeing a triangle, though the triangle is traced out by our looking, not by the 
sense data themselves. Similarly, to think of two points is to think of a straight 
line, and to think of one point is to think of the straight line that connects us 
to it. The geometry of the body-imagination is at work in all perception: "There 
is geometry in normal perception. Everything happens as if our bodies already 
knew the geometrical theorems which our mind does not yet know" (LP 51). 
Weil thought that cognizance of the bodily primacy of all order in human 
life might help to reorient the intellectual culture of her age. She was alarmed 
by the way the conditions of modern life destroy the mind-body equilibrium 
in everything, in the spheres of thought and action alike: "In its every aspect, 
the civilization we live in overwhelms the human body. Mind and body have 
become strangers to one another. Contact has been lost" (FLN 38). In every 
sphere, she writes—scientific, political, economic, artistic, religious—we seem 
to have lost "the very elements of intelligence," which are the ideas of limit, 
measure, degree, proportion, relation, comparison, contingency, interdepend­
ence, interrelation of means and ends. This loss has led to an intellectual cul­
ture of "lethal absurdity": a political universe "peopled exclusively by myths and 
monsters; all it contains is absolutes and abstract entities"; and a technocratic 
age in which "the only battles we know how to fight are battles against wind­
mills" (SE 156-57). Having lost contact with the body's ratio, intellect spins its 
wheels in unimpeded irrationality. 
The wager of her 1930 dissertation was that a new understanding of percep­
tion would provide the key to reunifying, revitalizing, and democratizing sci­
entific and philosophic knowledge by regrounding these pursuits in the body-

Simone Weil's Phenomenology of the Body	
207
© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2013
imagination, thus helping to bridge the "loss of contact" between body and 
mind in the late modern era (cf. N 248). The bodily basis of all order—percep­
tual and conceptual—is in fact upheld, not abrogated, she thought, in even the 
most abstruse abstractions of philosophy and science. Indeed, science has as its 
object "the study and the theoretical reconstruction of the order of the world—
the order of the world in relation to the mental, psychic, and bodily structure 
of man" (WG 169). 
Husserl parallels this hope a few years later in his late opus of 1936, The Cri­
sis of European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology, which profoundly 
influenced Merleau-Ponty's phenomenology of perception. As summarized by 
Frederick A. Olafson:
Husserl argued that the modern scientific worldview that had developed since 
the seventeenth century had, in effect, resulted in a kind of systematic oblivi­
ousness to the familiar perceptual world from which, in Husserl's view, the 
mathematico-physical sciences of nature take their departure and on which they 
remain dependent for their final interpretation. (Olafson 1967, 280)
Weil proposes that such systematic obliviousness can be overcome by a renewed 
grounding of science, and of human knowledge generally, in the fact that order 
is a condition of existence for a thinking creature. In other words, an ordered 
universe is a condition of existence for an ordered body, and an ordered body 
is a condition of existence for an ordered, effective mind (N 130). "The proper 
subject for science is the order of the world...and the order of the world should 
be wholly conceived under the category of condition of existence of a thinking 
creature" (N 463; emphasis in original).6
The point of this approach would be to acknowledge the ever-present element 
of human need and desire in science; the fact that need and desire figure in a very 
technical sense into all scientific theory and research. The human need for order 
is the motive interest functioning within every science, including that most 
abstract of theoretical sciences, mathematics. Why, after all, Weil asks, should 
algebra be looked upon as being any less "human" than color, sound, heat, and 
so on (N 76)? The humanness of science is attributable to the fact that it satisfies 
a human need for order, and specifically for an order complex enough that it is 
adequate to model the infinite complexity of the "obstacle" we seek to grasp: 
reality. Moreover, insofar as it does not completely overwhelm the grasp of con­
6.	
Condition of existence, as Weil conceives it, adjusts for habitual illusions of the imagination 
that are simultaneously seen through and retained; for example: "The state of rest of things 
is an illusion in this world in perpetual movement; so is the periodical return of phenom­
ena. But this illusion is for us a condition of existence" (N 479). 

208	
Lissa McCullough
© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2013
sciousness, the hyper-complexity of reality is a value: "The waking world, even 
from the most ordinary angle of perception, is a plurality of systems of possibili­
ties... Consciousness and reality are proportional to the multitude of simultane­
ously grasped systems by virtue of a single operation of the mind" (N 87). 
Neither in the case of ordinary perception nor in that of science does the 
order we find in nature belong to nature per se (LP 84). The order we find is 
"described" there by the path of encounter traversed by our body-imagination-
understanding—that is, by our perception, our logic, our hypotheses, our 
instruments, our work—and is funded by our desire.7 An accurate science, 
for Weil, would be one in which consciousness of human participation would 
never be interrupted, suppressed, or abstracted away (N 96). To suppress this 
determinative element is to suppress the mind-body relationship in its fullest 
implications, for "the human mind always models the universe on the relation­
ship between the soul and the body" (N 6). Most of the crises of modern aliena­
tion have derived from suppression of this organic, indivisible relationship 
between mind and body, subject and object, thought and desire, fact and value. 
In an early anti-Cartesian statement of 1925, Weil warns: "When we believe 
in the independence of mind from body, we are slaves of the body. It is when 
we become conscious of this slavery that we are truly conscious. Then we have 
the notion of truth" (PEP 298; my translation). Though she does repeatedly 
employ the categories of Cartesian dualism in her thinking, Weil uses those 
categories to make a case for the impossibility of dualism. For the early Weil, the 
only human freedom on earth is forged by the body-imagination taking hold of 
its obstacle—reality—in the form of work. 
Weil's Later Body-Thinking
Beginning in 1938, a series of transformative religious experiences shifted 
Weil's focus from philosophical to theological ideas throughout the remaining 
few years of her life. The centrality of the body began to function increasingly 
with reference to the life of faith and the import of "incarnation" within both 
Christianity and non-Christian religions. Continuity with her earlier thinking 
is nevertheless apparent in Weil's affirmation, in her journal of 1942, that the 
7.	
In an early exercise for her 1925 class with philosopher Alain (the pseudonym of Émile-
Auguste Chartier), Weil posits that we do not have consciousness of things, but of our 
attitudes in the face of things, which give us information about themselves inasmuch as 
we are in part constrained by them. "The imagination supplements that which is strongly 
insufficient for us about the exterior world...and produces a compromise that we call per­
ception." Without a grounding foundation in reality, imagination plays freely in the void 
(PEP 298, my translation and paraphrase).

Simone Weil's Phenomenology of the Body	
209
© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2013
needs and proportions of our body define—we might say "design"—the world 
in a certain way, inasmuch as they predispose us to certain perceptions and cor­
respondences rather than others: 
There is perhaps an order of the world corresponding to each place in the scale 
of things. The one which we are able to grasp is like a design which one would 
find on the section of a tree-stump after sawing through it. At any other place 
one would also have found a design; a different design, but no less a design. 
Our universe is a section cut out of the universe at a spot corresponding to the 
dimensions and structure of our body. Consequently the universe can only be 
known to us subjectively, as is the case with our organism too; but the appropri­
ateness which links the two together is a fact. (N 516) 
Implied here is the idea that the body, as it is perceptually and structurally pre­
disposed, "cuts out" a world appropriate to itself. This results in a body-world 
correspondence, and Weil refers to this explicitly as a macrocosm-microcosm 
correspondence (N 130). The human body is the "little world" that corresponds 
to the lineaments of that greater world which the body has apprehended in its 
own image according to its structure and disposition. "Man—a mind tied [liée] 
to a body—is only able to exist," Weil muses, "if this same body is an image of 
the universe, and if the limited portions of matter to which he has access are—
some of them—images of the universe" (N 107). Because of our primal need 
for order, we perceive the universe to be like our body and our body to be like 
the universe in analogical ways, in ways that manifest appropriate correlations. 
What bridges the correlative orders of macrocosm and microcosm in the 
creature is, for Weil, amor fati (N 130), love of the order of the world, which 
is equivalent in her later thinking to love of the will of God, for it is the will of 
God that first creates the world according to the rigors of necessity. In creat­
ing the world, Weil posits, God turns himself into necessity (N 190). The great 
and small orders of universe and body are concatenated together within this one 
inflexible universal order of necessity—which she understands in a complex Spi­
nozistic-Stoic sense (McCullough 2013, chaps. 4 and 6). This order requires that 
the body submit to a strict discipline in contact with the world. Truly to learn 
about the world is to undergo it bodily, obediently, and this becomes the whole 
preoccupation of mind, thoroughly embedded as it is in the body (N 107). 
The world is a text containing several meanings, and we pass from one meaning 
to another by an effort—an effort in which the body always participates, just as 
when we are learning the alphabet of a foreign language this alphabet has got 
to enter into our hand by dint of forming the characters. Apart from that, any 
change in the manner of thinking is illusory. (N 23) 

210	
Lissa McCullough
© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2013
Thought is merely illusory until it applies itself to bodily knowledge of the 
world, contending with the "obstacle" of sensuous reality and its data. In some 
cases such data may be grounded in materiality in only the most evanescent 
way, as when the sensuous imagination responds to music or poetry; but such 
experiences depend on a material component sine qua non, if only the materi­
ality of the instrument, the sound wave, the printed page, the recipient ear or 
eye. But what the body responds to in music—as contrasted with noise—is not 
the material data per se (the sound waves carrying this or that isolated note), 
but the pattern of relationships embodied in the succession of notes received 
aurally and grasped holistically. "Music doesn't reside in any single note but in 
a relationship; and yet it makes us weep. Man is made like that. Relationships 
touch his body [les rapports touchent son corps]" (N 486). On the fact that dif­
ferentials of tone, timbre, and measure can bring tears to the eyes, she remarks: 
"A relationship that draws tears. Strange." 
Here Weil touches on the mystery of music, the mystery of beauty as embod­
ied in artistic response: it engages and impresses the bodily imagination directly, 
more palpably than abstract or verbal intellect, instilling a pathos through felt, 
sensuous relationships that transcend verbal articulation. This is the mystery of 
incarnation, the creative materialization of spirit and vision. "The mystery of 
very great art is precisely this," Weil observes, "that an artist's doctrine passes 
into the work of his hands; and it matters little whether he can also express 
it in words" (SL 126). In such a case, the body of the artist is not so much the 
medium of creative expression as it is itself the creator. The body knows how to 
grasp and formulate relationships that the mind knows not how to conceive or 
invent. Weil knew this well, writing: "The spirit in its supreme manifestations 
imitates in some sort matter; is absent from its own thoughts and works" (N 
56). The imagination, directly grounded in bodily experience, apprehends rela­
tionships between things alogically through a bodily-mediated grasp. In this 
connection, Weil points to an analogy between habit and grace: the physical 
sense of the word grace is a perfection derived from habit, or practice in tech­
nique (N 171). Through bodily familiarity, for example, when the fingers play 
a song that the mind does not remember note for note, thought has to rehearse 
the finger movements to retrieve all the notes. 
Weil maintains that "the association between the human spirit and the body 
makes it so that there are necessarily physical effects of grace" (N 225). In other 
words, inspiration tends to incarnation. An artist of genius places God not in 
the intention motivating art but in the actual processes of his or her technique 
(N 602). Art produced by genius is not created for God conceived as a sort of 
supreme heavenly patron, but rather by God: by the presence of caritas incar­

Simone Weil's Phenomenology of the Body	
211
© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2013
nating itself in a new metaxic form. Weil writes in a letter to her mathemati­
cian brother André Weil that "the soul of genius is caritas," and such genius is 
distinguishable from talent by its deep regard for the common life of common 
people (SL 104-105). Genius is the incarnational movement of supernatural 
inspiration, making a gift of itself in and through the body engaged in its τέχνη. 
The thinking creature exhibits a need and longing for order both at the mac­
rocosmic level, in the cosmos envisioned as a whole, and at the microcosmic 
level of the organism involved in complex, multifarious relationships in the 
world. Relationships emerge from the body and touch the body because our 
imagination, with its inborn longing for beauty and order, is never abstract but 
is ever immanently embodied—in a sexual body at that. Indeed, of all forms of 
love that express a bodily longing for beauty, for order, for palpable and specific 
incarnation of the good, carnal love is perhaps the most intense and indomita­
ble. Carnal love in all its forms, Weil writes, from true marriage or platonic love 
down to the worst debauchery, has the beauty of the world as its object, and this 
longing to love the beauty of the world in a human being is essentially a longing 
for the incarnation (WG 171).
Carnal love is a quest for the Incarnation. We want to love the beauty of the 
world in a human being—not the beauty of the world in general, but the spe­
cific beauty which the world offers to each man and which corresponds exactly 
to the state of his body and his soul. (FLN 84) 
In the margins of her first notebook (1933), Weil had explored a possible 
analogy between physical love and physical labor: since to labor is to feel with 
one's whole self the existence of the world, she speculated, is to engage in physi­
cal love a quest to feel with one's whole self the existence of another being? "To 
be aware of the beloved over his whole perceptible surface, as a swimmer is of 
the sea. To live within a universe which is he" (FLN 9-10).
The possibility of understanding sexual love as a veneration of incarnate 
beauty opens the door, for Weil, to a sexuality that would be purified of will—
that is, innocent of need, sensual pleasure, grasping desire (N 610). The prob­
lem with sexual desire, for Weil as for Augustine, does not reside in the flesh 
per se but in the will and its inveterate propensity toward willful attachment 
(FLN 73). "Every attachment is of the same nature as sexuality," Weil writes 
(FLN 287); the vital energy of the body-imagination is bound up in attach­
ments to all kinds of things, for "one can project sexuality upon any kind of 
object: collector's hobby, money, power, group membership, cat, canary, God 
(but in this case it won't be the true God)" (FLN 287). Given that in Weil's 
estimation, "man only disposes of one single and unique love" (N 471), a choice 
of allegiance must be decided. The solution to releasing the bound-up energy of 

212	
Lissa McCullough
© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2013
desire is to "kill sexuality" (as she puts it) in order to effect a transmutation of 
the energy it contains; this is the process of detachment. 
If every attachment is of the same nature as sexuality, then the energy of attach­
ment originates as sexual energy, and sexual energy is simply the kind of energy 
we have available. Sexual love, and all attachments analogous to the sexual, are 
vital resources to be converted and transfigured rather than extinguished or 
squandered. To reproach mystics with loving God by means of the faculty of 
sexual love, she writes, is as though one were to reproach a painter with mak­
ing pictures by means of colors composed of material substances: "We haven't 
anything else with which to love" (N 472). The physiological ground of the 
mystic's love for God is erotic energy, but when the authentic mystic detaches 
that energy from will and desire, such detachment, according to Weil, effects 
the emission of the total amount of energy toward God (ibid.). Whatever feats 
of sublimation are required to achieve this, sexual energy thus transmuted and 
purified of attachment is pure. At a number of points she defends sublimation 
and attacks Freudian doctrine for failing to recognize the virtue of this radi­
cal purification and redemption of sexual energy (N 84). She complains that 
the whole of Freudian doctrine is saturated with "the very prejudice which he 
makes it his mission to combat," namely, that everything that is sexual is base (N 
472); whereas the sexual is base only when turned to base uses, manifesting an 
attachment of the will, as is most frequently the case. 
What purifies attachment is not withdrawal of love from the things of the 
world but, to the contrary, the expansion of love to the point where it is no 
longer selective, preferential, but universal in its scope. What love of God does, 
in Weil's theology, is detach desire from the preferential bases of love and per­
mit it to circulate freely, detachedly, universally. We do not become detached so 
much as transfer our attachment to the universe as a whole, and this is an experi­
ence of things in their full existence as warranted by the body: "To restrict one's 
love to the pure object [i.e., the object as God sustains and loves it] is the same 
thing as to extend it to the whole universe... Let all suffering make the universe 
enter into the body" (N 21; emphasis in original). Continuing in this vein, Weil 
bids "may the whole universe become for me a second body" (N 60; cf. N 13), 
and here she cites two senses in which this should be true: first, in the way the 
blind man's stick is an extension of his body, giving him indispensable contact 
with the real; and second, in the way that miserly Harpagon's treasure-casket 
becomes an appendage of his body, encapsulating all that he cherishes in a sin­
gular image of pure value. If the intensity of desire bound up in miserliness were 
vastly enlarged to embrace all things universally as its object, this would result 
in what Weil envisions in her full-fledged thinking of the universal body: 

Simone Weil's Phenomenology of the Body	
213
© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2013
Even though I die, the universe continues. That does not console me if I am 
anything other than the universe. If, however, the universe is, as it were, another 
body to my soul, my death ceases to have any more importance for me than that 
of a stranger. The same is true of my sufferings. (N 19) 
If we really love God, we necessarily think of him as being, amongst other 
things, the Soul of the World; for love is always connected with a body, and God 
has no other body which is offered to our sense except the universe itself. Then 
each occurrence, whatever it may be, is like a touch on the part of God. (N 322) 
This religious regard for the universe as God's body, which again points to 
amor fati as a fundamental commitment of Weil's thought, connects back to one 
of Weil's earliest writings as a 17-year-old student of the philosopher Alain, a 
brief reflection in which soul and universe continually "communicate" with each 
other via the body as medium: "The soul is united with the whole universe by 
the intermediary of a determinate body" as its "medium [moyen] of perception."8
Faith, as the later Weil defines it, expressly encompasses the disposition of the 
body, for "faith is a disposition of all the parts of the soul—and of the body as 
well—each one assuming with regard to the object of love the attitude suitable 
to its nature" (N 241). The body functions as a judicial balance central to the 
life of faith; indeed, nothing is more important to life on earth than the balanc­
ing act that the body effects in every human action. Bodily action is what deter­
mines the specific outcome when good and evil, nature and grace, are weighed 
against each other in the pressure of contesting circumstances. 
8.	
Weil's school exercise from 1926 reads: "The soul is tied to body, and through body to the 
whole universe... For everything affects everything else in the existent universe, and the 
body, subject to the action of the whole universe, transmits this action in some way to the 
soul. The soul is thus united with the whole universe by the intermediary of a determinate 
body and does not know how to be any other way. Everything that I see—this wall, these 
books, these papers—is finite in space and yet infinite insofar as the existence of all objects 
presuppose the existence of an infinite or, better put, an indefinite universe. The universe 
cannot manifest itself any other way; an indefinite universe per se is an abstraction... It is 
therefore not completely obvious, so to speak, that the indefinite universe can be perceived, 
but only as concentrated in an object. But this is not the object perceived; it is the perceiv­
ing body, or to speak more correctly, the body as medium [moyen] of perception. The soul 
cannot communicate with the universe as such; it can communicate only through a finite 
object, which is to the universe what a landscape is to the appearance of that landscape from 
a determinate point of view. But the nature of this finite object, which is the body, is not 
indifferent... The human body alone, among all existent objects, has the power to affect 
[le pouvoir d'affecter] a soul" (PEP 92-93, my translation). Emmanuel Gabellieri rightly 
suggests that, for Weil, the body has the vocation to become a cosmic body [corps cosmique], 
capable of being present to the whole universe (Gabellieri 2006, 91-92).

214	
Lissa McCullough
© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2013
It is the body which is the balance, for each moment it can perform but one 
action. It is a true balance when the attention is uniform. (N 57)
Since the body at any given moment can have but one single attitude, each one 
of our acts is a slayer of thoughts, for each act excludes an infinite number of 
other acts and makes it impossible at that particular moment for the thoughts 
corresponding to them to reach a state of existence. (N 52)
The body is the appropriate arbiter of the soul's conflicts about action, and this 
is its eminent dignity: "The body is the indispensable intermediary through 
which the soul brings real action to bear upon itself " (FLN 288). 
Ultimately, for Weil, the value of "spiritual" things can only be verified as an illumi­
nation projected onto physical things, and this is because only sensible things have a 
verifiable existence (FLN 147). Hence, respect and regard for the spiritual destiny of 
the human being is expressed indirectly (non-spiritually) by way of "the needs of the 
soul and of the body in this world" (SE 221). This makes matter the "universal test 
of what is real in thought," and this applies in the entire domain of thought, without 
exception: "matter is our infallible judge" (FLN 362). It is the "flesh" in medias res 
that not only marries matter and mind, but also nature and grace.
Concluding Reconsiderations
When Simone Weil enacted her quasi-Cartesian experiment in 1930, she did 
not purpose to eliminate Cartesian dualism, but this is what her argument 
achieves—at least in a rudimentary, incompletely developed way. It posits 
the cogito's constitutive foundation in bodily imagination—the imaginative 
body—as no philosopher had done as axially before, though significant steps 
in this direction were made by the early Kant, Bergson, Husserl, Whitehead, 
and Heidegger.9 She also did it as no philosopher was to do more fully until 
Merleau-Ponty published The Phenomenology of Perception more than a decade 
later in 1945. Indeed, the philosophical influences and affinities shared by these 
two contemporaries—who passed their agrégation in philosophy at the École 
Normale Supérieure one year apart (Merleau-Ponty in 1930, Weil in 1931)—are 
remarkable, though they worked with no detectable awareness of one another. 
Taylor Carman confirms that Merleau-Ponty was not personally acquainted with 
Weil, though they shared acquaintances in common, including Simone de Beau­
voir (Carman 2008, 4). The time window in which they might have encountered 
one another was narrow, given that Weil died in August 1943 at age 34. 
9.	
Edward Casey usefully outlines the approaches of several modern philosophers who seek to 
integrate the body into their thinking of the perception of space and place in chapter 10 of 
his The Fate of Place entitled "By Way of Body: Kant, Whitehead, Husserl, Merleau-Ponty" 
(Casey 1997, 202-242).

Simone Weil's Phenomenology of the Body	
215
© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2013
To my knowledge, no comparative studies of these two philosophers' think­
ing on the body are available, although their views on the Christian cross and 
French colonialism in Africa are addressed by Buttarelli (1996) and Bidima 
(2009), respectively. Weil scholars Emmanuel Gabellieri and Ann Pirruccello 
note general philosophical parallels between Weil and Merleau-Ponty in pass­
ing, but do not elaborate on them (Gabellieri 2003, 30, 78n203, 184n101; Pir­
ruccello 2002, 479-80). From the viewpoint of the present argument, however, 
Pirruccello's claim is demonstrated to be inaccurate: "At the same time that 
Weil breaks interesting new ground in the philosophy of the body, her inves­
tigation is limited by philosophical assumptions that see the body as separate 
from, and inferior to, spirit and ideas" (479). That this is a very common read­
ing of Weil—one that has long predominated, in fact—does not make it true. 
Let the evidence speak for itself, including the evidence reviewed here, and let 
interpretation of Weil's body-thinking be open to fresh consideration.
Weil's thinking, like Merleau-Ponty's, actually forefends the possibility of 
Cartesian dualism from the start, for a thinking that issues from the body-
imagination in the way that Weil describes it phenomenologically is actually 
constituted out of the body in a way that thinking remains dependent on it. 
Thinking cannot then doubt the body, the oil in the lamp, so to speak, with­
out extinguishing the flame, thought itself. Mind can abstract itself from the 
body-imagination only illicitly, in self-delusion, against its own condition and 
ground. The body fundamentally constitutes the res cogitans: without it, there 
can be no perception, no thought, no order, no world. 
In Weil's thinking, the imaginative body is that actively sentient, perceptively 
empowered portion of matter that first and continually engages the environ, 
delineates order, construes and specifies the data of reality, suffers necessity, 
arbitrates all important decisions pertaining to action, mediates real, existen­
tially necessary relationships for thought to think, and in the process incar­
nates faith. If thought presupposes the imaginative body as a sort of geometric 
medium capable of ordering an otherwise shapeless, senseless, chaotic material­
ity into a world, so likewise does matter employ the body as a medium to convey 
unto thought its existential task. The Cartesian orders of extensio and cogita­
tio coincide wholly in the body, constituting a single undivided world; for the 
world is constituted by thought "designing" matter, even as matter articulates 
itself in thought. The body is the unifying ground that ensures that these are 
not two disengaged processes but one and the same: thought imbuing itself in 
matter, matter illuminating itself in thought. 

216	
Lissa McCullough
© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2013
Although analytically we may distinguish these as movements in opposite 
directions, truly to think their relationship is to realize their actual effective 
unity. Just as two eyes see differentially, each possessing a different isolated 
image, yet producing one unitary field of vision, so the unitary "field of vision" 
of the body unifies thought and matter to produce a single environ: our "world." 
Thinking world by means of body, we are wise to bear in mind Rémi Brague's 
observation that "world" has never designated a simple description of reality 
but "has always translated a value judgment, the fruit of a sort of act of faith, 
either positive or negative" (Brague 2003, 23). Bodily mediation is the means 
and method by which world becomes real to us, and apart from the body's con­
tinuing arbitration it would be effectively "derealized" as a sort of dreamscape 
or grand illusion. Thought disengaged from material reality lacks its "obstacle" 
and turns upon itself in pure abstraction, signifying nothing really because 
nothing real is at stake. 
More than a single article is needed to draw forth the full significance of 
Simone Weil's body-thinking. The purpose at hand has been to adduce evidence 
in support of a core argument: that Weil's philosophy of the body belongs in 
the company of Merleau-Ponty's phenomenology of perception, as well as in 
historical confluence with his predecessors and followers in this "body-con­
scious" stream of twentieth-century philosophy. My hope is that Simone Weil 
will come to occupy her due position in the story of how the body finally came 
to think itself as its most indispensable presupposition. 
References
Bidima, Jean-Godefroy. 2009. "Readings of Emmanuel Lévinas, Maurice Merleau-
Ponty and Simone Weil: Abstract Universalism and 'Details' about the 
African World." Forum for Modern Language Studies 45(2), (March): 188-
199. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/fmls/cqp010
Brague, Rémi. 2003. The Wisdom of the World: The Human Experience of the Universe 
in Western Thought. Translated by Teresa Lavander Fagan. Chicago, IL: Uni­
versity of Chicago Press. 
Buttarelli, A. 1996. "La croce e il suo centro: Il chiasma come problema in Merleau-
Ponty e in Simone Weil." Chiasmi International: 15-26. 
Carman, Taylor. 1999. "The Body in Husserl and Merleau-Ponty." Philosophical Topics 
27(2), (Fall): 205-226. http://dx.doi.org/10.5840/philtopics199927210
______. 2008. Merleau-Ponty. London: Routledge. 
Casey, Edward S. 1997. The Fate of Place: A Philosophical History. Berkeley: University 
of California Press.

Simone Weil's Phenomenology of the Body	
217
© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2013
Descartes, René. 1990. Meditationes de prima philosophia / Meditations on First Philoso­
phy: A Bilingual Edition. Edited and translated by George Heffernan. Notre 
Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.
Gabellieri, Emmanuel. 2003. Être et don: L'unite et l'enjeu de la pensée de Simone Weil. 
Louvin: Peeters. 
Hegel, G. W. F. 1988. Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion: One-Volume Edition. Edited 
by Peter C. Hodgson. Translated by R. F. Brown, P. C. Hodgson, and J. M. Stew­
art, with the assistance of H. S. Harris. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Husserl, Edmund. 1970. The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental Philosophy. 
Translated and introduced by David Carr. Evanston, IL: Northwestern Uni­
versity Press. 
Kant, Immanuel. 1968. "Concerning the Ultimate Foundation of the Differentiation 
of Regions in Space." In Selected Pre-critical Writings and Correspondence 
with Beck, 36-43. Translated by G. B. Kerferd and D. E. Walford. New York: 
Barnes & Noble.
______. 1992. "Dreams of a Spirit-Seer Elucidated by Dreams of Metaphysics." In The­
oretical Philosophy, 1755-1770. Translated by David Walford and Ralf Meer­
bote. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McCullough, Lissa. 2013. The Religious Philosophy of Simone Weil: An Introduction. 
London: I. B. Tauris. 
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. 1962. The Phenomenology of Perception. Translated by Colin 
Smith. New York: Humanities Press.
Olafson, Frederick A. 1967. "Merleau-Ponty, Maurice," Vol. 5 of The Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy. New York: Macmillan & Free Press. 
Pirruccello, Ann. 2002. "Making the World My Body: Simone Weil and Somatic Prac­
tice." Philosophy East and West 52(4), (October): 479-497. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1353/pew.2002.0037
Weil, Simone. 1956. The Notebooks of Simone Weil (N). 2 vols. Translated by Arthur 
Wills. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
______. 1962. Selected Essays, 1934-1943 (SE). Edited and translated by Richard 
Rees. London: Oxford University Press. 
______. 1965. Seventy Letters (SL). Translated by Richard Rees. Oxford: Oxford Uni­
versity Press.
______. 1970. First and Last Notebooks (FLN). Translated by Richard Rees. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
______. 1973. Waiting for God (WG). Translated by Emma Craufurd. New York: 
Harper & Row.

218	
Lissa McCullough
© Equinox Publishing Ltd. 2013
______. 1978. Lectures on Philosophy (LP). Translated by Hugh Price. Introduction by 
Peter Winch. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
______. 1987. Formative Writings, 1929-1941 (FW). Edited by Dorothy Tuck 
McFarland and Wilhelmina Van Ness. Amherst: University of Massachusetts 
Press. 
______. 1988. Premiers écrits philosophiques (PEP). Vol. 1 of Oeuvres complètes. Edited 
by Gilbert Kahn and Rolf Kühn. Paris: Gallimard. 
Whitehead, Alfred North. 1925. Science and the Modern World. New York: Free Press.

