Body, Movement and Dance in Psychotherapy
An International Journal for Theory, Research and Practice
ISSN: 1743-2979 (Print) 1743-2987 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/tbmd20
The role of embodiment and intersubjectivity in
clinical reasoning
Shaun Gallagher & Helen Payne
To cite this article: Shaun Gallagher & Helen Payne (2015) The role of embodiment and
intersubjectivity in clinical reasoning, Body, Movement and Dance in Psychotherapy, 10:1,
68-78, DOI: 10.1080/17432979.2014.980320
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/17432979.2014.980320
Published online: 17 Nov 2014.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 3470
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 12 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=tbmd20

The role of embodiment and intersubjectivity in clinical reasoning
Shaun Gallaghera,b,c* and Helen Payned
aDepartment of Philosophy, University of Memphis, Memphis, TN, USA; bSchool of
Humanities, University of Hertfordshire, Hertfordshire, UK; cFaculty of Law, Humanities
and the Arts, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, Australia; dSchool of Education,
University of Hertfordshire, Hertfordshire, UK
(Received 2 August 2014; accepted 20 October 2014)
Embodied approaches to cognition have been recently challenging standard
views in philosophy of mind and the cognitive sciences. We propose that these
embodied cognition views hold implications for clinical reasoning. This article
examines the role of embodiment and intersubjective interactions between
patient and therapist in clinical reasoning in psychotherapy. It offers a
phenomenologically informed enactive conception of clinical reasoning and
characterises it as an ongoing embodied, embedded and intersubjective process,
rather than a strictly mental process 'in the head' of the therapist.
Keywords: embodied cognition; enactivism; body-as-subject; intersubjectivity;
phenomenology
Introduction
Clinical reasoning refers to processes that contribute to professional judgements
made before, during and after clinical sessions in a variety of medical and
psychotherapeutic contexts (Edwards, Jones, Carr, Braunack-Mayer, & Jensen,
2004; Levett-Jones et al., 2009; Øberg, Norman, & Gallagher, in press). In most
models of clinical reasoning the focus is on high-order mental or intellectual
processes, such as thinking, reﬂecting, evaluating, identifying problems and
establishing goals. Thus, Levett-Jones et al. (2009) list the following types of
operations as among those essential to the clinical reasoning process: describing
facts, contexts, objects or people; collecting information; recalling knowledge;
interpreting and analysing data; identifying problems and issues; establishing goals;
selecting a means; evaluating outcomes; and reﬂecting on the process. This nicely
summarises elements of what has been termed the 'hypothetic-deductive model' for
clinical reasoning (Higgs & Jones, 2008; Øberg et al., in press), where clinicians
focus on information from and about the patient, and pay attention to signs and
symptoms to form a tentative hypothesis regarding diagnosis, applying their learned
knowledge in constructive ways.
A somewhat different diagnostic reasoning model is based on a more trained,
intuitive form of 'pattern recognition' that focuses on an almost immediate
q 2014 Taylor & Francis
*Corresponding author. Email: s.gallagher@memphis.edu
Body, Movement and Dance in Psychotherapy, 2015
Vol. 10, No. 1, 68-78, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17432979.2014.980320

recognition of certain features of the case. Benner, Hughes and Sutphen (2008)
provide a good explanation of this approach by contrasting theoretical or thinking
models (like the hypothetic-deductive one) with technical know-how and practical
wisdom ( phronesis), citing Aristotle's original distinction between these kinds of
knowledge. On the one hand, technical know-how is, in their view, a practical
knowledge, guided by means-ends rationality. Yet, when they describe this kind
of knowledge in more detail, they use terms like 'rational calculations', the use of
'population trends and statistics, algorithms' to support decision-making and
improve accuracy of clinical judgements, as well as 'ongoing working knowledge of
pathophysiology, biochemistry, and genomics'. Although they acknowledge that we
are 'embodied beings', this fact seems to drop out of their account, or indeed, never
ﬁgures into it. On the other hand, some aspects of clinical practice involve practical
wisdom, which, according to Aristotle, is more like the intuitive knowledge that we
gain in intersubjective contexts, including 'reasoning about the particular, across
time, through changes or transitions in the patient's and/or the clinician's
understanding'. On the interpretation offered by Benner et al. (2008, p. 5), this may
take the form of 'puzzle solving or the evaluation of immediate past "hot" history of
the patient's situation'.
These accounts highlight important elements of clinical reasoning. Both Levett-
Jones et al. (2009) and Benner et al. (2008), however, in explanations designed
primarily for medical contexts, isolate considerations of clinical reasoning from
anything that involves hands-on or bodily processes. That is, in these accounts, and
almost all other discussions of clinical reasoning across various therapeutic contexts,
the focus is on hypothetic-deductive logic or intuitive pattern-recognition processes;
even when concepts like technical know-how and practical wisdom are brought in,
there is no discussion of pragmatic embodied, hands-on processes or speciﬁcs of
intersubjective practice, although, for Aristotle, this is where practical wisdom is
learned and practised. More generally, the standard accounts of clinical reasoning
take 'reasoning' to be a highly intellectual or cognitive performance, and this
follows a long established view of cognition (and reasoning) in philosophy and
science, as primarily an 'in the head' type of activity. If, however, we consider that
more embodied approaches to cognition have recently challenged such standard
views in philosophy of mind and the cognitive sciences, we are motivated to ask
whether these embodied (embedded, enactive and extended) views hold any
implications for clinical reasoning.
Perhaps a ﬁrst response would be that surely in some clinical settings bodily
processes are more involved and play some role in clinical reasoning. Yet, even in
contexts where the body seems to be the target of therapeutic practice (e.g. in
nursing or physical therapy), characterisations of clinical reasoning remain
somewhat disembodied (for the physical therapy context, see Øberg et al., in press).1
Indeed, even in clinical settings where there is a lot of hands-on interaction, we ﬁnd
that the way clinical reasoning is conceived, and the way that the body is treated, is
not necessarily in line with the idea of embodied cognition. The implicit theoretical
conception of the body that operates in such contexts reﬂects a traditional Cartesian
materialism where the body is understood purely as physical mechanism, a
biomechanical system, in contrast to the mind or consciousness, which is treated as a
subjective epiphenomenal product of brain states (Thornquist, 2006). From this
Body, Movement and Dance in Psychotherapy
69

medicalised and mechanical view, knowledge of the body is reducible to a collection
of third-person objective facts, and is treated as an object, usually with the intention
that it has to be ﬁxed in some way.
In this paper we want to propose a concept of embodied clinical reasoning
relevant to clinical practices of psychotherapy, one which also applies to medical
and physiotherapy contexts. In this regard, we will generalise some insights gained
in the context of physiotherapy and worked out in some detail in Øberg et al.
(in press).
Embodied cognition and phenomenology
In contrast to the medicalised and objective conception of the body, embodied
cognition approaches that are informed by phenomenology make an important
distinction between the objective body (Ko¨rper, or body-as-object) and the lived
body (Leib, or body-as-subject) (Husserl, 1989; Merleau-Ponty, 1962). Although
one can perceive one's body and view it in an objective manner (the body-as-object),
as a perceiver (subject, or agent) one is a body and therefore perceives, experiences
and acts in an embodied way (body-as-subject). As Merleau-Ponty (1962) explains,
there is an ambiguity about the body insofar as one both has a body and is a body.
The notion of embodied cognition primarily involves the body-as-subject, the
perceiving, moving and acting body that experiences the world. The embodied
subject is understood in dynamical terms as an agentive system coupled to its
environment, which is both physical and social.
Phenomenologically informed enactive views on embodied cognition, for
example emphasise the idea that perception is informed by bodily movement and
serves action. It is action-oriented - and this shapes most cognitive processes (e.g.
Noe¨, 2004). Embodied and enactive approaches to cognition often call for radical
change in our ways of thinking about body, brain and mind (Gallagher & Varela,
2003; Thompson, 2007; Thompson & Varela, 2001; Varela, Thompson, & Rosch,
1991). On such views, the mind is not simply 'in the head' or reducible to brain
processes; it is rather distributed across brain, body and environment in such a way
that the body and environment contribute to cognition by dynamically scaffolding
and taking over some of the cognitive load (Menary, 2007).
Enactive theorists claim that bodily processes and environmental factors (which
Gibson [1979] called 'affordances') contribute to the constitution of cognition in
irreducible and irreplaceable ways (Fuchs & De Jaegher, 2009; Noe¨, 2004).
Speciﬁcally, according to the enactive view, biological and emotion regulation of
the entire body has a permeating effect on cognition, as do processes of sensory-
motor coupling between organism and environment (Bower & Gallagher, 2013;
Hurley, 2002; Noe¨, 2004; O'Regan & Noe¨, 2001). In this respect, the notion of
cognition is broadened to include processes that happen between body and
environment. In problem solving, for example one does not necessarily think
everything through in a purely mental way. Rather, one may discover a solution
through movement or the manipulation of different artefacts or technologies in the
local environment. This may be as simple as using a pen and notebook to work out a
mathematics problem (Clark & Chalmers, 1998), or to clarify thoughts, moving to a
different position to gain a different perspective or arranging or manipulating the
70
S. Gallagher and H. Payne

environment to facilitate a certain complex task. This also means that the design of
the clinical setting, for example the kind of useful or facilitating artefacts and
affordances that are present in the room, can enter into the reasoning process.2 For
therapy, this means that the focus is not exclusively on the meanings of words and
narratives for the creation of meaning, but rather on action, object use and
interaction with the therapist. For example, in the context of play therapy, Rucinska
and Reijmers (2014, p. 39) suggest that the action of playing
[ . . . ] counters the tendency to focus exclusively on the meanings of words and
narratives, text and discourse. Instead, playing adds and reinforces the narratives,
allowing new perceptions and meanings to be created through the use of objects and
interaction with the therapist. That is because playing should allow mutual creation of
meanings to a greater extent than mere speaking as it incorporates non-verbal
communication, and so, has more degrees of freedom in how to interpret it. When
therapist and client play with objects, words, narratives, text and discourse are less
important as the playing takes over their role. The meanings get 'ofﬂoaded' to the
objects one is playing with, and through staying in the play discourse, a new dimension
to narrating the problems emerges.
In the clinical setting, such actions and environmental manipulations help to scaffold
clinical reasoning. In this regard, we should think of clinical reasoning as both
embodied and enactive. Perception and cognition in the clinical reasoning process
can be modulated through movements and actions that involve manipulation of the
environment, as well as hands-on practice. Clearly in physiotherapy, and also in any
psychotherapeutic approaches that involve the body, whether by putting hands on,
manipulating artefacts or engaging in bodily interactions, the therapist, working
together with the patient, is gaining knowledge that will inform ongoing and future
practice.
Hands-on practice, as found in physiotherapy or some forms of psychotherapy,
is not a matter of a top-down intellectual or ideational regulation of movement,
or simply a one-way route from brain to hand; nor is it a completely bottom-up
emergence of rationality, hand to brain. The clinical reasoner is a single integrated
cognitive system (Iverson & Thelen, 1999). This implies a reciprocal dynamics of
feedforward-feedback processes in which the hand and the brain form a dynamic
system that reaches into the world to explore the patient's functional possibilities
and problems. Importantly, the patient's resistance or positive response also
contributes to the reasoning process.
For clinical reasoning, then, whether in physiotherapy or psychotherapy, it is
useful to know that judgements made on the basis of visual observation of the body
at rest in various postural attitudes will differ from judgements made in the context
of dynamic action or physical interaction between the clinician and patient.
In action, for example from a ﬁrst-person perspective, the felt differentiation
between hand and arm across the wrist is reduced (de Vignemont, Majid, Jola, &
Haggard, 2009). That is, the hand is not experienced as a body part differentiated
from the arm but is experienced as continuous with the arm: likewise the arm with
the shoulder, in a holistic way (Gallagher, 2005a; Tsakiris & Haggard, 2005).
Similarly, hands-on interventions, as well as practices that involve bodily movement
more generally, are more holistic than practices that depend on visual observation
solely. Moreover, it is not just the 'body-schematic' processes of the patient that are
Body, Movement and Dance in Psychotherapy
71

involved; the therapist's body is also part of the equation and the interactive
manipulation of the patient's body also involves the therapist's body schema.3
Therapist-patient interaction involves what Merleau-Ponty (1962, p. 352) calls
intercorporeity, which refers to a dynamic intersubjective embodied interaction
involving proprioception and kinaesthesia. In such interaction, the ﬁrst-person
experience of the body is modulated by a second-person experience of interacting
with the other. The holistic system expands to include both embodied subjects and in
some cases behaves like one coherent body-schematic system.
Interaction
In this kind of process, the therapist is not simply collecting information, as one
might do in detached observation. Rather, in what De Jaegher and Di Paolo (2007)
call 'participatory sense making', the experiences and meanings that are generated
go beyond anything that could be accomplished by each individual on her own.
Something that is not so common in cases of purely physical coupling, but that we ﬁnd
in the social domain, is that patterns of coordination can directly inﬂuence the
continuing disposition of the individuals involved to sustain or modify their encounter.
In this way, what arises in the process of coordination (e.g. gestures, utterances and
changes in intonation that are sometimes labelled as back-channeling or turn-repair,
etc.) can have the consequence of steering the encounter or facilitating (or not) its
continuation. And the particular unravelling of these dynamics itself inﬂuences what
kinds of coordination are more likely to happen. This is due to the fact that the
interactors are highly plastic systems that are susceptible to being affected by the
history of coordination. (p. 492)
In dance movement psychotherapy (Payne, 2003, 2006a), for example there is often
a movement dialogue between therapist and patient. Whether one-to-one or in a
group, this is a shared 'dance' which is an interactive process. The therapist may
shape her movement qualities and/or posture to reﬂect the patient's movement
patterns (e.g. mirroring, contrasting or echoing), adapt or clarify them. Alternatively,
the therapist may use her body-felt sense to engage with, and respond to, the
patient's emotional/feeling content as manifested in their movement, subsequently
creating a non-verbal conversation together - a form of kinaesthetic intersubjec-
tivty, usually without words (although it may involve sound) (Samaritter & Payne,
2013). There may then be a 'languaging' of the communication as reﬂection-
on-action through writing and/or verbal communication by the therapist in
supervision (Panhofer & Payne, 2011), and this can be part of the clinical reasoning
process in situ with the patient. The way the patient moves with the therapist, or not,
will inform the him/her about the clinical presentation and help him/her to assess the
way forward for the patient; or indeed, in the movement process, the patient may ﬁnd
his/her own way forward, or may lead the therapist to a certain assessment.
This process, then, makes it possible for the patient to experience a dynamic
relationship with the therapist which is co-constructed in a mutual creative
endeavour. Meaning-making may occur from the interactive movement whereby the
patient's story can unfold more deeply. The experiences of both the therapist and the
patient in this 'dance of interaction' (feelings, sensations, thoughts, images or bits of
narrative, for example) may inform clinical judgement and promote understanding
for both of them; it also provides more material on which to base assessment or
72
S. Gallagher and H. Payne

treatment plans. Accordingly, the embodied (kinematic) engagement on the part of
the therapist, and more generally, the relational interaction between therapist and
patient, enters into clinical assessments of the patient and should be considered part
of clinical reasoning (Øberg et al., in press). Indeed, in some cases, the movement or
action or interaction itself just is the working out of a strategy that works and thereby
constitutes, in part, the clinical reasoning process.
Clinical practice involves embodied intersubjective interaction that should seem
obvious for those involved in various body-based psychotherapies (e.g. dance
movement therapy, gestalt therapy/dramatherapy role-playing, play therapy, body
psychotherapy), but it is also the case even in those encounters where less hands-on
processes or motor affordances are involved such as verbal psychotherapy and
counselling approaches. Embodied processes are involved in any context in which
there are two people communicating, even if they are not touching. For example,
one's posture, spatial position, gestures, facial expressions, vocal intonation - these
are all aspects of bodily performance that elicit responses from the other. To the
extent that this is the case, then clinical reasoning is not simply something that one
or the other individual accomplishes on his own. Following the enactive perspective,
in intersubjective contexts perception serves interaction with others. Embodied
interaction is part of the process that allows mutual understanding and generates
meaning in the process of 'participatory sense-making' (De Jaegher & Di Paolo,
2007; De Jaegher, Di Paolo, & Gallagher, 2010; Gallagher, 2009).
In this regard, Fuchs and De Jaegher (2009) distinguish between processes
of coordination to and coordination with. The former involves individual uni-
directional embodied actions, therapist to patient. The latter, coordination with, in
contrast, involves interaction and encompasses coordination or attunement with the
patient. Such coordination involves two active participants: the therapist as a lived
body-as-subject with his/her multidimensional professional knowledge incorporated
in his/her practice and the patient, also a body-as-subject, including how he/she
experiences and expresses himself/herself in the therapeutic situation. Both
participants give and take whilst using a variety of bodily expressions: gaze
direction, positioning, utterances and intonations, gestures, facial expressions,
hands-on or other physical intentional interactions. In this circumstance the
development of a mutual enactive coupling supports an embodied clinical
reasoning, accomplished through joint attention and joint action and resulting often
in a shared agency and a participatory sense-making.
Psychotherapy employing Authentic Movement (Konopatsch & Payne, 2011;
Payne, 2006b) may illustrate this mutual enactive coupling which can contribute to
clinical reasoning. Here is an example from the second author's practice. This is the
ﬁrst assessment session with a new patient. The therapist (here called 'witness') has
already been told by the patient (here called 'mover') about a traumatic incident in
their past.
During the ﬁrst session the mover/patient stands with eyes closed. The witness sees an
in-breath held in his/her mover's upper chest. This breath does not appear to expire but
remains held for some time. The mover is then seen to open his/her eyes for a few
seconds and then close them again at which time the witness notices that the mover's
breath is let out, very slightly retracting the chest downward. During this moment in the
mover's body the witness ﬁrstly senses a tension in his/her own upper chest and
Body, Movement and Dance in Psychotherapy
73

tightness in his/her face. When in the presence of the mover's eyes opening he/she tells
himself/herself that this may be a need in the mover to check that all is ok (particularly
as this is the ﬁrst session and trust has yet to be established between them). On seeing
the eyes close again the witness experiences relaxation in his/her body - signifying that
perhaps all is ok - and when the expulsion of air is noticed he/she feels relieved but is
left with the feeling that there is more to be let out.
In the verbal dialogue following this experience the mover speaks of the moments
before and after he/she opened his/her eyes as signiﬁcant. He/she describes his/her
feelings in that moment as being 'held' and, as he/she explains this, he/she clenches his/
her ﬁst, placing it on his/her upper chest. He/she goes on to describe tears being bottled
up just there, in his/her upper chest. He/she says that he/she cannot express these tears.
The witness sees tears in his/her eyes at this point, however they are not shed. The
witness is now feeling sadness. The witness says nothing, however, judging it to be too
early in the therapeutic relationship to comment.
The mover then asks for witnessing (that is he/she requests that the therapist/witness
offer his/her perspective whilst in the presence of that moment). The witness tells of
his/her experience whilst in the presence of the eyes opening and closing and the chest
movement. He/she speaks about the sensation in his/her chest and of his/her face
feeling tight at that moment. He/she reﬂects with his/her mover about his/her
interpretation of the eyes opening as needing to check out if everything was safe. He/
she explains the slight relief and relaxation in his/her body on seeing the chest move,
the breathing out and his/her feeling that there was more to be released.
The mover is quite struck by the witnessing. He/she explains that he/she had come to
understand that tears needed to be shed about his/her traumatic loss, yet to date he/she
had not been able to let them out, although he/she has tried many ways to do this,
including counselling and hypnotherapy. He/she says he/she had felt seen by his/her
witness. He/she comments that he/she is still feeling vulnerable and fears he/she will
'drown' in the sadness inside of his/her if he/she releases it.
With reference to clinical reasoning, the therapist considers the following: the
presenting motivation for attending the assessment session, the traumatic loss, the
context of the ﬁrst session and the movement experience as witnessed and as expressed
by the patient.
In terms of treatment planning following this assessment session, the need to express the
traumatic loss is clearly a primary aspect for the future therapeutic relationship. However,
the block to the expression of the sadness and the patient's fear that it would drown the
patient if expressed are also important areas of work. The understanding that the therapist
has gained through his/her body-felt experience in the presence of his/her mover/patient
demonstrates the block, as a result of the fear perhaps. Clearly, the goal for the patient is
to express his/her tears; however, there is a deeper, more disrupted process to address
indicated by both the patient's verbal disclosure and his/her bodily expressions.
This kind of embodied interaction or intercorporeity involves an understanding
of the other person based on what Trevarthen (1979) calls 'primary
intersubjectivity', that is on those sensory-motor processes just mentioned of facial
expressions, postures, movements, gestures and the dynamic give and take of
interaction with the other which deﬁne the clinical encounter as a joint action.
In such engagements, timing and emotional attunements are important. Although
there can be quick repair of minor disturbances in timing and attunement, more
serious disruptions can lead to a failure of understanding. In addition, since such
interactive processes are always situated, i.e. they always happen within particular
contexts, the participants' understanding of the context or situation also enters into
74
S. Gallagher and H. Payne

their understandings of one another. This dependency on contextual factors is
referred to as secondary intersubjectivity.
The idea that the communicative practice between therapist and patient is a joint
action that requires coordination, i.e. where the activity evolves in sequences of
turn-taking and perception-action loops, means that clinical reasoning is not just in
the head of the therapist. For example, disruptions in the dynamics of interaction,
surprises or unexpected outcomes, according to Scho¨n (1991), motivate reﬂection-
in-action, or as Øberg et al. (in press) suggest, a reﬂection-in-interaction - a kind of
second-person or joint reasoning. This does not necessarily mean that the patient is
explicitly making strategic suggestions or recommendations (although that may
happen); rather, the patient's embodied responses contribute to the reasoning
process, a process that is shaped by the particularities of the situated expressions and
actions and interactions that take place in the clinical setting.
Social aspects also enter into the clinical setting and set up certain expectations in
the patient, framing the interaction and contributingto the co-creation of meaning - the
participatory sense-making - that characterises successful interactions. Physical
environment and social context, accordingly, contribute to 'secondary intersubjective'
understandings(Trevarthen& Hubley,1978),that isjustthose aspectsofunderstanding
thatare drawn fromthe particularities ofthe situation, orinthiscase,the clinicalsetting.
Both the therapist and the patient also bring to the therapeutic session certain narratives
(Gallagher & Hutto, 2008). These narratives reﬂect both general social norms and
speciﬁc patterns of expectations concerning clinical practice. All of these factors - the
embodied immediacy of primary intersubjectivity, the contextualisation involved in
secondary intersubjectivity and the narrative background - complicate, but also enable
clinical reasoning, which needs to draw on all of these resources.
Conclusion
On this model, the embodied clinical reasoning process is accomplished in a system
where, in addition to 'in-the-head' conceptual or propositional knowledge and neural
activations, other, non-conceptual, non-propositional, extra-neural factors of body and
environment contribute as well. Decision-making is not reducible to a knowledge
processing understood abstractly as a purely intellectual event. More frequently, it is a
co-constituted process motivated by a meeting of eye-gaze and gesture as the therapist
interacts with the patient and feels resistance or accommodation. Just as reasoning may
be accomplished in intersubjective communicative practices where we reach a decision
through discussion, so reasoning to the right strategy in therapeutic practice may be
accomplished in an intercorporeity - a proprioceptive/kinaesthetic communication
discoveredasthetherapistandthepatientengageinbodilyactionsandcommunications.
Therapeutic practice accordingly requires a multidimensional knowledge in
which theory and research, a truly embodied techne (technical knowledge) and a
fully interactional intersubjective phronesis (practical wisdom), are integrated in a
co-construction of meaning. Phronesis only ﬁnds traction in the particularities of the
situation, which includes, as the primary element, the other person. Once we are
in situations of joint attention and joint action, critical reasoning becomes a kind of
shared contextualised interaction that allows for and builds upon a mutual
understanding between therapist and patient.
Body, Movement and Dance in Psychotherapy
75

Disclosure statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the authors.
Notes
1.
Consider, also, recent concerns about the status of the physical exam in medical practice.
Apparently physicians have adopted practices that minimise physical contact with
patients, and this has been a growing point of debate in the medical disciplines. There are
even positive recommendations for this approach - the following one for psychiatrists:
Fortunately, it is possible to examine patients without having to touch them.
In fact, the physical exam, which is often done without any specialized medical
equipment, can be performed while standing in the hall and observing the patient
through the doorway. (Madan, 2002, p. 1356)
To be fair, Madan is describing a technique that might be used if a psychiatrist is not able to
do a hands-on physical exam of the patient, and the recommendation comes with certain
qualiﬁcations. Yet, there is something that approaches established knowledge in this regard:
Despite a long and storied tradition, a physical exam is more a habit than a
clinically proven method of picking up disease in asymptomatic people. There is
scant evidence to suggest that routinely listening to every healthy person's lungs,
or pressing on every normal person's liver, will ﬁnd a disease that wasn't
suggested by the patient's history. (Ofri, 2010, p. D5)
On the one hand, Dr Ofri goes on to emphasise the non-medical importance of touch. On the
other hand, others have had to argue that the physical exam is of some medical beneﬁt (e.g.
Verghese & Horwitz, 2009).
2.
In this regard, and speciﬁcally in regard to the practise of body psychotherapy, Ro¨hricht,
Gallagher, Geuter and Hutto (2014) suggest novel ways of designing clinical settings using
virtual (and mixed) reality (VR and MR) technology. For example, symptoms of boundary
lossand somatic depersonalisation can be addressed withcreation of virtual 'homes' withthe
ability to open or close the space as required within a virtual therapy room. One can also use
suchtechnologytore-enactthevirtuallivedexperienceofaconﬂictorproblemconstellation.
3.
We use the term 'body schema' to mean 'a system of sensory-motor capacities that
function without awareness or the necessity of perceptual monitoring' (Gallagher, 2005a,
p. 24). We distinguish it from the concept of body image, 'a system of perceptions,
attitudes, and beliefs pertaining to one's own body' (Gallagher, 2005a, p. 24). For more
on this distinction, see Gallagher (2005a, 2005b).
Notes on contributors
Shaun Gallagher is the Lillian and Morrie Moss Professor of Excellence in Philosophy at the
University of Memphis, Research Professor of Philosophy and Cognitive Science at the
University of Hertfordshire and Professorial Fellow in Philosophy at the University of
Wollongong.
Helen Payne is Professor of Psychotherapy in the School of Education at the University of
Hertfordshire. She is the Founding Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
References
Benner, P., Hughes, R. G., & Sutphen, M. (2008). Clinical reasoning, decisionmaking, and
action: Thinking critically and clinically. In R. G. Hughes (Ed.), Patient safety and
quality: An evidence-based handbook for nurses. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK2643/#_
ch6_s1_
76
S. Gallagher and H. Payne

Bower, M., & Gallagher, S. (2013). Bodily affects as prenoetic elements in enactive
perception. Phenomenology and Mind, 2, 108-131.
Clark, A., & Chalmers, D. (1998). The extended mind. Analysis, 58, 7-19.
De Jaegher, H., & Di Paolo, E. (2007). Participatory sense-making. Phenomenology and the
Cognitive Sciences, 6, 485-507.
De Jaegher, H., Di Paolo, E., & Gallagher, S. (2010). Can social interaction constitute social
cognition? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 14, 441-447.
de Vignemont, F., Majid, A., Jola, C., & Haggard, P. (2009). Segmenting the body into parts:
Evidence from biases in tactile perception. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 62, 500-512.
Edwards, I., Jones, M., Carr, J., Braunack-Mayer, A., & Jensen, G. M. (2004). Clinical
reasoning strategies in physical therapy. Physical Therapy, 84, 312-330.
Fuchs, T., & De Jaegher, H. (2009). Enactive intersubjectivity: Participatory sense-making
and mutual incorporation. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 8, 465-486.
Gallagher, S. (2005a). How the body shapes the mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gallagher, S. (2005b). Dynamic models of body schematic processes. In H. De Preester &
V. Knockaert (Eds.), Body image and body schema (pp. 233-250). Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Gallagher, S. (2009). Two problems of intersubjectivity. Journal of Consciousness Studies,
16, 6-8.
Gallagher, S., & Hutto, D. (2008). Understanding others through primary interaction and
narrative practice. In J. Zlatev, T. Racine, C. Sinha, & E. Itkonen (Eds.), The shared mind:
Perspectives on intersubjectivity (pp. 17-38). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Gallagher, S., & Varela, F. (2003). Redrawing the map and resetting the time:
Phenomenology and the cognitive sciences. Canadian Journal of Philosophy,
29(supplementary 1), 93-132.
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual perception. Boston, MA: Houghton
Mifﬂin.
Higgs, J., & Jones, M. (2008). Clinical decision making and multiple problem spaces.
In J. Higgs (Ed.), Clinical reasoning in the health professions (pp. 3-17). Sydney:
Elsevier Health Sciences.
Hurley, S. L. (2002). Consciousness in action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Husserl, E. (1989). Ideas pertaining to a pure phenomenology and to a phenomenological
philosophy: Second book studies in the phenomenology of constitution. (R. Rojcewicz &
A. Schuwer, Trans.). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Iverson, J. M., & Thelen, E. (1999). Hand, mouth and brain: The dynamic emergence of
speech and gesture. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 6, 11-12.
Konopatsch, I., & Payne, H. (2011). The emergence of body memory in Authentic Movement.
In S. Koch, T. Fuchs, & C. Mu¨ller (Eds.), Body memory, metaphor and movement
(pp. 341-352). Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
Levett-Jones, T., Hoffman, K., Bourgeois, S., Kenny, R., Dempsey, J., Hickey, N., . . .
Jeffrey, K. (2009). Clinical reasoning: Instructor resources. School of Nursing and
Midwifery Faculty of Health, University of Newcastle. Retrieved from http://www.utas.
edu.au/__data/assets/pdf_ﬁle/0003/263487/Clinical-Reasoning-Instructor-Resources.pdf
Madan, S. (2002). The doorway physical exam: What every psychiatry resident should know.
Canadian Medical Association Journal, 167, 1356.
Menary, R. (2007). Cognitive integration: Mind and cognition unbounded. London: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1962). Phenomenology of perception. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Noe¨, A. (2004). Action in perception. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Body, Movement and Dance in Psychotherapy
77

Øberg, G. K., Norman, B., & Gallagher, S. (in press). Embodied clinical reasoning in
neurological physical therapy. Physical therapy: Theory and practice.
Ofri, D. (2010, August 3). Not on the doctor's checklist, but touch matters. New York Times
(New York ed.).
O'Regan, J. K., & Noe¨, A. (2001). A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 24, 939-972.
Panhofer, H., & Payne, H. (2011). Languaged and non-languaged ways of knowing. British
Journal of Guidance and Counselling, 39, 455-470.
Payne, H. (Ed.). (2003). Dance movement therapy: Theory and practice (5th reprint). London:
Routledge.
Payne, H. (Ed.). (2006a). Introduction: Embodiment in action. Dance movement therapy:
Theory, research and practice (pp. 1-17). London: Routledge.
Payne, H. (2006b). The body as container and expresser: Authentic movement groups in the
development of wellbeing in our bodymindspirit. In J. Corrigall, H. Payne, &
H. Wilkinson (Eds.), About a body: Working with the embodied mind in psychotherapy
(pp. 162-180). London: Routledge.
Ro¨hricht, F., Gallagher, S., Geuter, U., & Hutto, D. (2014). Embodied cognition and body
psychotherapy: The construction of new therapeutic environments. Sensoria: A Journal
of Mind, Brain & Culture, 56, 11-20.
Rucinska, Z., & Reijmers, E. (2014). Between philosophy and therapy: Understanding
systemic play therapy through embodied and enactive cognition (EEC). InterAction, 6,
37-52.
Samaritter, R., & Payne, H. (2013). Kinaesthetic intersubjectivity: A dance informed
contribution to self-other relatedness and shared experience in nonverbal psychotherapy
with an example from Autism. Arts in Psychotherapy, 40, 143-150.
Scho¨n, D. A. (1991). The reﬂective practitioner. London: Maurice Temple Smith.
Thompson, E. (2007). Mind in life: Biology, phenomenology, and the sciences of mind.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Thompson, E., & Varela, F. J. (2001). Radical embodiment: Neural dynamics and
consciousness. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5, 418-425.
Thornquist, E. (2006). Face-to-face and hands-on: Assumptions and assessments in the
physiotherapy clinic. Medical Anthropology, 25, 65-97.
Trevarthen, C. (1979). Communication and cooperation in early infancy: A description of
primary intersubjectivity. In M. Bullowa (Ed.), Before speech: The beginning of
interpersonal communication (pp. 321-347). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Trevarthen, C., & Hubley, P. (1978). Secondary intersubjectivity: Conﬁdence, conﬁding and
acts of meaning in the ﬁrst year. In A. Lock (Ed.), Action, gesture and symbol: The
emergence of language (pp. 183-229). London: Academic Press.
Tsakiris, M., & Haggard, P. (2005). Experimenting with the acting self. Cognitive
Neuropsychology, 22, 387-407. doi:10.1080/02643290442000158
Varela, F. J., Thompson, E. T., & Rosch, E. (1991). The embodied mind: Cognitive science
and human experience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Verghese, A., & Horwitz, R. I. (2009). In praise of the physical examination: It provides
reason and ritual. BMJ, 339, b5448. doi:10.1136/bmj.b5448
78
S. Gallagher and H. Payne

