Indo-Paciﬁc Journal of Phenomenology
ISSN: 2079-7222 (Print) 1445-7377 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/ripj20
Interpretive Hermeneutic Phenomenology:
Clarifying Understanding
Ann E. McManus Holroyd
To cite this article: Ann E. McManus Holroyd (2007) Interpretive Hermeneutic Phenomenology:
Clarifying Understanding, Indo-Paciﬁc Journal of Phenomenology, 7:2, 1-12, DOI:
10.1080/20797222.2007.11433946
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/20797222.2007.11433946
Published online: 01 Sep 2007.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 15763
View related articles 
Citing articles: 17 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ripj20

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology, Volume 7, Edition 2 
September 2007  
Page 1 of 12 
 
 
The IPJP is a joint project of Rhodes University in South Africa and Edith Cowan University in Australia. This document is subject to 
copyright and may not be reproduced in whole or in part via any medium (print, electronic or otherwise) without the express permission of the 
publishers. 
 
The Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology (IPJP) can be found at www.ipjp.org. 
 
 
 
 
Interpretive Hermeneutic Phenomenology: Clarifying Understanding 
 
by Ann E. McManus Holroyd 
 
 
Abstract 
 
The philosophical orientation of Gadamerian hermeneutic phenomenology is explored in this 
paper. Gadamer offers a hermeneutics of the humanities that differs significantly from models of 
the human sciences historically rooted in scientific methodologies. In particular, Gadamer 
proposes that understanding is first a mode of being before it is a mode of knowing; what this 
effectively offers is an alternative to the traditional way of understanding in the human sciences. 
This paper details why the work of hermeneutics is not to develop a procedure for understanding, 
but to clarify the conditions of understanding. In this explication, the author examines the 
hermeneutic experience and, in the process, relates it to both the practical and the historical 
horizons of the lifeworld of health professionals, particularly nurses. 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
Contemporary culture holds the physical world and its 
tangible objects in high regard. This respect is based 
on a culturally situated awareness of empirical 
science and the way that it has earned a reputation for 
delivering important objective truths. The culture of 
science encourages individuals to uphold its methods 
as the main standard upon which they judge and come 
to know their world. In particular, the scientific 
method supports individuals to free themselves from 
bias, and to attain distance from those contextual 
features that are unique to their life history. Simply 
stated, science simulates the production of effects that 
would not come about by themselves; it impressively 
cultivates outcomes by attempting to control and at 
times eliminate the natural, unpredictable experiences 
that are the hallmark of each human life. 
 
This article diverges from the dominant research 
tradition of modern empirical science by offering a 
detailed exploration of interpretive hermeneutic 
phenomenology. In particular, it draws on the 
writings of Hans-Georg Gadamer, who offers an 
interpretive hermeneutic philosophy that transcends 
the models of the human sciences rooted in traditional 
scientific methodologies. Within an interpretive 
hermeneutic research tradition, the intent is not to 
develop a procedure for understanding, but to clarify 
the conditions that can lead to understanding. To 
engage in the experience of understanding is likened 
to a reflective discovery of sorts, one that is very 
different from an objectified method of knowledge 
attainment. The interpretive hermeneutic research 
tradition attends to the realization that in all journeys 
of discovery, such as those involving human research, 
one can never hope to discover everything. In other 
words, when embarking on this type of practical 
philosophical inquiry, it is important to recognize that 
all resulting understanding will never be complete: 
some experiences will remain undiscovered 
 
The Primary Concern of Hermeneutics 
 
The origin of hermeneutics in its modern day use 
dates back to the 17th century, where it gained 
importance in the context of biblical studies (Crotty, 
1998). Scholars, according to Crotty, turned to 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology, Volume 7, Edition 2 
September 2007  
Page 2 of 12 
 
 
The IPJP is a joint project of Rhodes University in South Africa and Edith Cowan University in Australia. This document is subject to 
copyright and may not be reproduced in whole or in part via any medium (print, electronic or otherwise) without the express permission of the 
publishers. 
 
The Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology (IPJP) can be found at www.ipjp.org. 
 
 
hermeneutics to provide guidelines for interpreting 
scriptures. Since the 17th century, hermeneutics has 
moved into many areas of scholarship and been 
applied to text other than scriptures, including 
unwritten sources.  
 
The meaning and scope of the term "hermeneutics" is 
an important consideration in a research study that 
concerns itself with interpretation. Etymologically the 
roots of the word hermeneutics lie in the Greek verb 
hermeneuein, which is generally translated as 
"interpret" or "understand" (Crotty, 1998; Palmer, 
1969). The noun hermeneia means the utterance or 
explication of thought; and the name, Hermeus, refers 
to the playful, mischievous, "trickster" Hermes 
(Caputo, 1987; Grondin, 1995; Moules, 2002). As the 
divine, wing-footed messenger of the gods, Hermes 
was gifted with the ability to translate or interpret 
messages from the gods into a form that humans 
could understand. This process of bringing messages 
from beyond our own realm of experience into a 
humanly intelligible form involves language.  
 
Six different domains of hermeneutics emerged 
during modern times, each representing a standpoint 
on the act of interpretation (see Palmer, 1969). 
Although each domain brings to the forefront 
legitimate but different influences on the act of 
interpretation, there are particular hermeneutic 
domains that suit the unique beliefs, philosophies and 
practices of the interpretive inquirer. The two 
domains that offer the greatest meaning in the context 
of this particular hermeneutic inquiry are the 
phenomenology of existential understanding and 
interpretive procedures. Friedrich Schleiermacher 
(1768-1834) and, later, William Dilthey (1833-1911) 
are cited as pioneers who contributed to the modern 
beginnings of the interpretive alternative in Western 
philosophy. Both reacted to the rationalistic sciences 
and indicated their inadequacy in understanding 
human phenomena (Hughes & Sharrock, 1997). Since 
Dilthey, many fundamental postulates of the 
rationalistic sciences have been brought into question. 
His work prepared for the move from epistemological 
understanding toward ontological understanding in 
the human or cultural sciences (Ricoeur, 1973). The 
writings of Martin Heidegger (1889-1976) and Hans-
Georg Gadamer (1900-2002) offer a detailed 
exploration of the phenomenology of existential 
understanding and the interpretive alternative. 
 
The primary concern of hermeneutics is the 
philosophy of understanding (Geanellos, 1998). 
Elucidating the conditions whereby understanding 
takes place is a central feature of hermeneutics, and 
this is repeatedly emphasized within Gadamer's 
philosophical writings (Schwandt, 1999). Above all 
else, hermeneutics proposes that there are no such 
things as measurable behaviours, stimuli, and 
associated 
responses. 
Instead, 
investigation 
is 
prompted through such things as encounters, 
lifeworlds and meaning (Van Manen, 1977). Suffice it 
to say that all human science research efforts share a 
common feature: the desire to explore and become 
more familiar with the human lifeworld. Our life-
world reflects both our way of being in the world and 
the structure of meaningful relationships that we 
create in the world.  
 
Interpretive hermeneutic understanding differs from 
other ways of understanding by presupposing that all 
texts and non-texts are strange and inaccessible - and, 
as such, distanced from the interpreter. But a paradox 
exists: for, despite the sense of strangeness and 
distance between the interpreter and the individual 
and/or text, there is an assumed link or commonality 
between the two, making the event of understanding 
feasible. This event of understanding is an on-going 
effort basic to our being in this world. Scientific 
modes of understanding entail a kind of knowing that 
moves away from existence and personal experience 
into a world of concepts. By contrast, interpretive 
hermeneutic understanding is rooted in a historical 
encounter 
and 
concerns 
itself 
with 
personal 
experiences of being here in this world (Palmer, 1969, 
p. 10). Furthermore, in hermeneutic interpretation, 
language is pivotal, because it shapes all situations 
and experiences that we find ourselves in. Language 
and understanding are inseparable structural aspects 
of human-being-in the world (Laverty, 2003). 
 
The 
opportunity 
to 
engage 
in 
hermeneutic 
understanding is likely to arise when individuals 
undergo any experience that serves to disrupt the 
ordinary, taken for granted aspects of existence. As 
Travelbee (1971) suggests, human beings are 
motivated to create meaning in the different 
experiences that shape their life. Any number of life 
experiences can motivate the individual to search for 
meaning, such as the arrival of illness. Through our 
own unique experiences, we are moved to reflect on 
our dominant ideologies and usual rules of 
understanding, and this becomes all the more 
important when we realize that our dominant ideology 
offers minimal help in assisting us in coming to know 
the phenomenon that has motivated our interest. In 
other words, the individual becomes more aware of 
the limitations that exist within the dominant, 
scientifically oriented perspective with its tendency to 
reduce human experience to the law of averages. 
Interpretive hermeneutic understanding is born from 
the recognition that all human experiences are both 
rich and complex.  
 
Efforts toward understanding the unique experiences 
of each individual involve not so much a mental or 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology, Volume 7, Edition 2 
September 2007  
Page 3 of 12 
 
 
The IPJP is a joint project of Rhodes University in South Africa and Edith Cowan University in Australia. This document is subject to 
copyright and may not be reproduced in whole or in part via any medium (print, electronic or otherwise) without the express permission of the 
publishers. 
 
The Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology (IPJP) can be found at www.ipjp.org. 
 
 
intellectual process, but rather a way of being, a way 
of behaving in our existence (Grondin, 2003). This 
way of being and behaving does not correspond with 
the 
common 
instrumentalist 
conception 
of 
understanding, which is rife with criteria, norms, and 
foundations. It is a way of being and behaving that 
can never be taught. In other words, it does not come 
about as a result of learning rules; rather, it is formed 
or cultivated through our own unique experiences. It 
is within our experiences that we come to recognize 
how our attachment to a firmly grounded knowledge 
base promotes a form of ignorance where we are 
unprepared to recognize what we do not know. 
Experience, when approached from a stance of 
openness, places our mental and intellectual processes 
at stake, and demonstrates a willingness to surrender 
our attachments to our current knowledge. Through 
this way of being, individuals are intent not on 
knowing more but on knowing differently. Simply 
stated, the inquirer is prepared to surrender, through a 
stance of openness, what he or she currently knows, 
and it is in this surrender that the inquirer has the 
potential to be transformed. An example that many 
individuals can relate to is parenting. Prior to 
becoming a parent, we possess a predominantly 
mental or intellectual understanding of what we 
believe parenting is. It is only through a life 
experience that brings us closer to the lifeworld of 
parenting that we are motivated to surrender our prior 
conceptions or attachments to what we once thought 
parenting would be. Maybe we thought that it would 
be easy to have 'obedient children' and that parents of 
disobedient children were doing something wrong; 
something which we intellectually conceptualized 
could be remedied through 'proper parenting'. But 
now our experiences prepare us to relinquish our 
intellectual attachment to this way of knowing, and, 
in doing so, we come to realise that parenting is 
wholly different from what we once imagined. We are 
thus transformed and now understand parenting in an 
entirely different light. 
 
What this indicates is that, when the individual, as 
inquirer, brings together ontology and epistemology - 
ways of being and ways of knowing - there is more 
opportunity to move beyond the limitations associated 
with knowledge constructed purely from 
the 
methodologies of the natural sciences: methodologies 
which rely on a predominantly epistemological and 
instrumentalist conception of understanding.   
 
Working the Fore-Structure of Understanding 
 
What interpretive hermeneutic understanding offers 
the inquirer is the ability to begin to see the way in 
which our blind attachment to certain classifications 
and categorizations limit how we understand and 
come to know our world. Heidegger, as explained by 
Gadamer (1960/1989), speaks at great length about 
the disclosure of the fore-structure of understanding 
in the hermeneutic experience. The fore-structure, 
according to Heidegger (1927/1962), is an innate 
capacity that exists in all individuals to intuit the 
meaning of being. What the fore-structure offers is a 
shadowy grasp of the existential nature of existence. 
More specifically, what is implied is that every 
encounter we have is grounded and guided by 
something that exists in advance - an already decided 
way of conceiving that which we are interested in. 
Within the fore-structure of understanding, whenever 
we know and understand something, the interpretation 
is founded essentially upon what Heidegger (1927/ 
1962) frames as our fore-having, fore-sight and fore-
conception. What all of this guides us to understand is 
that there can never be a presuppositionless stance in 
any act of interpretation. Awareness of this often 
taken for granted aspect of our existence - that we 
possess a fore-structure of understanding - is what 
helps us to relinquish our attachments to how we 
currently know and understand the world.   
 
There is little value in an interpretive approach to 
understanding where one engages in a particular, 
concrete kind of interpretation. For both Heidegger 
and Gadamer, "working the fore-structure" involves a 
desire to overcome incessant habits of thought, which 
they each identify as distractions. These distractions 
are seen as projections of meaning imposed onto the 
individual and/or text. What Heidegger emphasizes is 
our tendency, as soon as meaning emerges in a text, 
to apply or project that meaning to the text as a 
whole. Take, for example, the issue of suffering. In an 
article by Gregory (1994), he talks candidly about the 
medicalization of suffering and its reduction to a 
physiological event. Suffering, according to Gregory, 
has been depersonalized by health professionals, and 
this "fore-conception" of the health professional is 
neatly packaged into popular conception. This 
conception, which is evident throughout the medical 
literature, 
identifies 
pain 
and 
suffering 
as 
interchangeable (Gregory, 1994). What this does is to 
reduce suffering to one of its many aspects, pain. 
Furthermore, the broader context of suffering is then 
viewed as having only one applicable meaning, 
physical pain, which is accordingly applied to the 
individual or the text as a whole. Health professionals 
consequently conceive of suffering as controllable 
and, with minimal input from the individual or text, 
turn to a tool that guarantees some form of immediate 
action, pharmaceuticals. Both the health professional 
and the suffering individual, based on this popular 
conception, are thus engaged in a relationship where 
there is disembodied knowing. The relationship lacks 
depth of meaning because it is guided predominantly 
by the tenets of an epistemology that is empirically 
based. The effect of this stance, or health care 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology, Volume 7, Edition 2 
September 2007  
Page 4 of 12 
 
 
The IPJP is a joint project of Rhodes University in South Africa and Edith Cowan University in Australia. This document is subject to 
copyright and may not be reproduced in whole or in part via any medium (print, electronic or otherwise) without the express permission of the 
publishers. 
 
The Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology (IPJP) can be found at www.ipjp.org. 
 
 
tradition, is the way that it discounts, amongst other 
things, the fore-structure of understanding.    
 
Health professionals, even though they do not often 
vocalize it, recognize that each individual's existence 
or emergence in the world manifests itself in a unique 
fore-structure of understanding. However, through the 
nature of the health professional's work - caring for 
individuals in an unpredictable environment with a 
perceived lack of time - there is pressure to conform 
to a certain way of being, and most often this way of 
being moves the health professional to categorize, 
through inductive type reasoning, the client and his or 
her identified area of concern. In other words, health 
professionals' fore-structure of understanding has 
been reduced to that of 'popular conception'. One 
way to change fore-conceptions that have been 
reduced to 'popular conceptions' is to examine them 
as they arise through what Heidegger and Gadamer 
call the hermeneutic circle. Heidegger described the 
hermeneutic circle as the anticipated movement of 
fore-understanding (Gadamer, 1960/1989). Within 
this circle, understanding moves beyond the usual 
stance of subjective or objective interpretations; 
instead, what is offered is the interplay of movement 
between tradition and interpretation.  
 
Exploring the Art of Understanding 
 
Understanding is defined as the original characteristic 
of the being of human life itself (Gadamer, 1960/ 
1989, p. 259). When speaking of understanding, 
Gadamer holds that traditional hermeneutics has in 
fact inappropriately narrowed the horizons within 
which understanding 'stands'. For Gadamer, as for 
Heidegger, all understanding is ultimately self-
understanding; it is the individual's mode of being. 
To clarify this notion necessitates a more extensive 
exploration of the art of understanding or Verstehen.  
 
The art of understanding is akin to a game in which a 
to-and-fro movement characterizes the encounter with 
that which we seek to understand (Schwandt, 1999). 
Any 
interpretation 
or 
understanding 
from 
a 
hermeneutic perspective always begins with the 
interpreter's fore-projections, our fore-projections 
being a product of our situatedness in the world. "We 
understand the world before we begin to think about 
it; such pre-understanding gives rise to thought and 
always conditions it" (Weinsheimer, 1985, p. 11). 
Therefore, to begin the process of understanding, such 
as in the early phase of a research study, one must 
start by reflecting on one's own fore-projections or 
pre-understandings and the meanings that exist within 
them in an effort both to determine their legitimacy 
and to contain their influence on new understanding.  
 
My own fore-projections are born from my history, 
culture, language and sociopolitical experiences, and 
constitute the familiar horizons of my lifeworld. For 
example, as a health professional, I am situated within 
a certain dominant perspective of illness. What I 
know about illness is often based on technical 
knowledge or scientific reason. Technical knowledge 
offers me greater control and mastery over the event 
of illness, mostly through compartmentalizing the 
individual who is experiencing illness. In other words, 
technical knowledge constructs and frames the illness 
experience in terms of specific clinical discourse, 
such as the overt reliance on objective data and 
clinically verifiable facts. Getting to know the Being 
of another occurs in a very different way from getting 
to know specific things about that Being. Sociologist 
Arthur Frank (1991) brings this into sharp focus by 
utilizing the notion of the ride vs the story in his 
explication of the illness experience. Dominant 
clinical discourse divorces experience (the ride) from 
the meaning (the story) and seeks to tell individuals 
who they are and how they feel.  
 
Awareness is growing amongst health professionals 
of the limited way in which context or story is 
addressed in both research and practice concerning 
the individual's illness experience. Often this occurs 
because of the basic assumptions health professionals 
hold about what illness specifically is. When illness is 
constructed in a technical and highly epistemological 
way, context is notably absent, and gaps or breaches 
in inter-subjectivity ensue. Without bridging this gap, 
illness is severed from the context of thought, feeling 
and perception, and this gives rise to obscurity in 
meaning. Expressing what appears to be a similar 
idea, Thorne, Nyhlin, and Paterson (2000, p. 304) 
explain that the realities of chronic illness and the 
general 
assumptions 
underlying 
health 
care 
relationships lead to several contradictions. One that 
is particularly relevant to research and practice 
concerning illness is the way that health professionals 
know the pattern of illness in a general sense, whereas 
the individual understands his or her illness in an 
infinitely more sophisticated sense (Paterson & Sloan, 
1994; Thorne, Nyhlin, & Paterson, 2000). When 
health professionals limit how it is that they come to 
know individuals, how does this influence research 
and practice concerning individuals and their 
illnesses? Heidegger suggests that "someone who 
accepts and passes on the current chatter, even if the 
chatter happens to be in some sense correct, sheds no 
light of his own" (Inwood, 1997, p. 48). For health 
professionals who wish to shed some light of their 
own, the desire must thus exist to move beyond the 
clinical literalism - the truth, facts, and clinical detail - 
they have come to associate with individuals facing 
life-changing events like illness.  
 
To begin the process of transforming current ways of 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology, Volume 7, Edition 2 
September 2007  
Page 5 of 12 
 
 
The IPJP is a joint project of Rhodes University in South Africa and Edith Cowan University in Australia. This document is subject to 
copyright and may not be reproduced in whole or in part via any medium (print, electronic or otherwise) without the express permission of the 
publishers. 
 
The Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology (IPJP) can be found at www.ipjp.org. 
 
 
knowing, there must be a willingness on the part of 
health professionals - in research and practice - to 
merge their own history and culture with the history 
and culture of an unfamiliar other. One's ability to 
experience and understand the encounter with the 
other will be directed by the initial fusion of the 
familiar - your own lifeworld - with the unfamiliar - 
the individual other's lifeworld. From here, it is 
possible to begin to challenge the taken for granted 
attitudes and beliefs that are part of each individual's 
context and history. In other words, this type of 
research and practice involves a willingness to engage 
in a progressive letting go of what we currently know 
and understand. In brief, this is the beginning of 
hermeneutic understanding. 
 
Accomplishing the goal of arriving at a new 
understanding entails engagement in language: which 
is where the world is disclosed to us. 
 
Language and the Disclosure of the World 
 
Both Heidegger (1927/1962) and Gadamer (1977) 
identify 
language 
as 
integral 
to 
hermeneutic 
understanding. It is in language that our world is 
disclosed to us. The world that is spoken of here is 
not the environmental scientific world, but the 
lifeworld (Palmer, 1969). Common to modernity is a 
view of the world as a possession or the property of 
our own subjectivity. To think of the world in this 
manner makes it highly impersonal, so that world, 
figuratively speaking, stands outside the individual. In 
other words, within this view, world is something that 
exists within our highly subjectively oriented 
thinking. From a hermeneutic perspective, it is an 
error to think of the world in this manner. The world 
is not impersonal; it is something that exists between 
individuals. The world and our existence in the world 
is what creates a shared understanding between 
individuals, and the medium that makes this 
understanding of the world possible is language. 
Language 
is 
where 
the 
world 
resides, 
and 
hermeneutic experience, as we understand it, occurs 
in and through language; it is language that discloses 
the world in which we live.  
 
Beginning with Heidegger, and then with Gadamer, 
there has been a movement away from what is termed 
the classic view of language - a view that was 
influenced in the late 18th century by science and 
rationalism. Within this classic view, language is 
merely an instrument of thought and communication, 
shaped and mastered by the individual. According to 
Taylor (1997), language, in the classic view, is 
understood within the confines of science and 
rationalism.  
 
Both 
Heidegger 
and 
Gadamer 
transcend 
the 
limitations of the classic view of language. Diverging 
from the dominant perspective, Gadamer (1977) 
expresses that language is not reducible to an 
instrument or tool. Instead, by nature of birth, one is 
born into language, and for that reason it is already 
with us. As people grow into language or linguistic 
interpretation, they are already biased in their 
thinking and knowing. Using children as an example, 
Gadamer refutes the still popular claim that learning 
to speak means learning to use a pre-existent tool for 
designating a world that is already familiar to us. He 
calls it madness that humanity thinks it can in some 
way re-discover the original language of humanity. 
To conceptualize language presupposes that one has a 
consciousness of language. What is really happening 
here, according to Gadamer (1977), springs from the 
unconscious operation of language; in other words, to 
reflect about language is to once again draw back into 
language. 
Gadamer 
and 
Heidegger 
share 
the 
perspective that human beings are already at home in 
language; that birth grants an enclosedness in the 
linguistic world in which one lives. Drawing on the 
hermeneutic circle, Heidegger and Gadamer identify 
the value of language from their non-classic 
perspective.  
 
Language, within the hermeneutic circle, is essential 
to lichtung or 'clearing'. More simply stated, 
language opens access to meaning, and is the 
condition on which the human world is disclosed. 
Such disclosure is not intra-psychic - that is, it does 
not occur exclusively within a person; rather, it occurs 
in the spaces between humans. Language, for that 
matter, is the dominant force defining the space that 
humans share with each other (Taylor, 1997). 
Language is never a private affair, but instead is 
shared between humans. For that reason, language 
cannot be viewed as a subjective happening 
(Schwandt, 1999). There is an "I-lessness" to 
language, most evident in the fact that "Whoever 
speaks a language that no one else understands does 
not speak. To speak means to speak to someone" 
(Gadamer, 1977, p. 65). Language and speaking are 
understood as a to-and-fro play that transcends 
subjectivity. Gadamer (1977) describes this through 
the use of a game metaphor: 
 
The back and forth movement that takes 
place within a given field of play does not 
derive from the human game and from 
playing as a subjective attitude. Quite the 
contrary, even for human subjectivity the 
real experience of the game consists in the 
fact that something that obeys its own set of 
laws gains ascendancy in the game. To the 
movement in the determinate direction 
corresponds a movement in the opposite 
direction. The back and forth movement of 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology, Volume 7, Edition 2 
September 2007  
Page 6 of 12 
 
 
The IPJP is a joint project of Rhodes University in South Africa and Edith Cowan University in Australia. This document is subject to 
copyright and may not be reproduced in whole or in part via any medium (print, electronic or otherwise) without the express permission of the 
publishers. 
 
The Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology (IPJP) can be found at www.ipjp.org. 
 
 
the game has a peculiar freedom and 
buoyancy that determines the consciousness 
of the players. ... Whatever is brought into 
play or comes into play no longer depends 
on itself, but is dominated by the relation 
we call the game. (p. 53) 
 
Tightly bound in the mysterious yet dominant nature 
of language is the ongoing issue of understanding. 
Understanding is not limited to an activity of the "I", 
or something that happens to self; rather, like 
language, understanding involves a loss of self. 
Understanding arises out of being. To engage in 
understanding a text or person does not mean getting 
inside the person's mind. Instead, it simply means 
being open to the perspective from which the person 
or text has formed the views to be disclosed. 
Understanding, if created in this way, transcends the 
subjectivist and objectivist stance, and is more of a 
movement between what Gadamer calls tradition and 
interpretation.  
 
Illuminating the Fusion of Horizons 
 
Demonstrating that all understanding is ultimately 
interpretive and hermeneutical, Gadamer utilizes 
Edmund Husserl's phenomenological concept of 
"horizon" and Martin Heidegger's account of the 
radical historicity of the human situation and human 
understanding (Dostal, 2002). All understanding, 
according to Gadamer, is a historically effected event 
or situation that is both linguistic and dialogical. 
Gadamer (1960/1989) explains that an essential 
feature in defining our present situation is the concept 
of horizon: "The horizon is the range of vision that 
includes everything that can be seen from a particular 
vantage point" (p. 302). Individuals who possess a 
limited horizon have difficulty seeing far enough and 
may overvalue that which is nearest to themselves. 
On the other hand, an individual who is said to have a 
horizon is not limited to see only that which is nearby 
but is able to see that which is beyond. 
 
When attending to historical understanding, the 
concept of horizon is also significant. Gadamer 
(1960/1989) emphasizes the importance of gaining an 
appropriate historical horizon so that we are able to 
understand something in its true dimensions. The 
appropriate historical horizon that Gadamer speaks of 
requires inter alia a willingness on the part of the 
inquirer to not try simply to transpose him- or herself 
into a particular historical time. The inquirer must 
question whether or not there is a historical horizon in 
which s/he as an inquirer already exists, and a 
historical horizon from the past in which s/he as the 
inquirer is trying to place him- or herself. What this 
offers to the inquirer is realization of the importance 
of questioning whether there are such things as closed 
horizons and what limitations arise when we engage 
in this predominantly abstract way of thinking. 
Because of the historical movement of human life, 
Gadamer suggests that there can never be a closed 
horizon and a singular standpoint from which the 
inquirer seeks to gain understanding. Rather, a 
horizon is something into which we move and that 
moves within us (Gadamer, 1960/1989). To that end, 
the horizon of the past is always in motion. In 
recognizing this, the inquirer comes to understand 
that the horizon of the present cannot be formed 
without the past: "There is no more an isolated 
horizon of the present in itself than there are historical 
horizons which have to be acquired. Rather 
understanding is always a fusion of these horizons 
supposedly existing by themselves" (Gadamer, 1960/ 
1989, p. 306). Gadamer's philosophical ideas go to 
great length to attend to the role of historical 
understanding in all interpretation, and to the 
illumination of the fusion of horizons in extending 
understanding (Palmer, 1969).   
 
When Gadamer speaks about the fusion of horizons, 
he offers a distinct movement away from traditional 
research and its accompanying focus on method and 
methodology. Most extraordinary is Gadamer's 
ability to think beyond the idea of understanding as a 
strictly instrumental process. In particular, Gadamer 
points to the false claims of method and the way that 
our abandonment of the humanist tradition in the 19th 
and 20th centuries led to the dominance of method. 
Gadamer's hermeneutics strives to build a new bridge 
to the humanist tradition (Grondin, 2003). His 
concern with the humanist tradition starts off with the 
notion of culture or Bildung, which he believes 
constitutes knowledge for the humanist tradition. 
Although Bildung has several meanings in German, 
Gadamer (1960/1989) characterizes Bildung as the 
properly human way of developing one's natural 
talents and capacities. Humanity is something that we 
develop and cultivate as human beings and which 
differentiates us from non-human animals. As such, 
humans are constantly in the process of self-
development through engagement with culture and 
civilization. It is in building and forming oneself 
through Bildung that one assumes a stance of 
openness to other points of view and perspectives that 
differ from one's own (Grondin, 2003). "What makes 
the human sciences into sciences can be understood 
more easily from the tradition of the concept of 
Bildung than from the modern idea of scientific 
method. It is to the humanistic tradition that we must 
turn. In its resistance to the claims of modern science 
it gains a new significance" (Gadamer, 1960/1989, p. 
18). 
 
The humanist tradition reminds us that the human 
sciences are about our very being, elucidating the 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology, Volume 7, Edition 2 
September 2007  
Page 7 of 12 
 
 
The IPJP is a joint project of Rhodes University in South Africa and Edith Cowan University in Australia. This document is subject to 
copyright and may not be reproduced in whole or in part via any medium (print, electronic or otherwise) without the express permission of the 
publishers. 
 
The Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology (IPJP) can be found at www.ipjp.org. 
 
 
importance of being open to the social, historical and 
temporal nature of life, and the role of language in all 
understanding. The difficulty that many individuals 
experience in carrying out an interpretive hermeneutic 
research study, and particularly a study based on 
Gadamerian hermeneutics, is the lack of examples 
within the literature to guide their analysis. This is 
where caution must come into play and one must 
resist seeking out concrete examples for interpretive 
hermeneutic based research studies. When concrete 
examples are conveniently offered, there is a risk of 
creating a fixed standpoint and a solitary horizon of 
meaning. To engage in research from a fixed stand-
point and a solitary horizon is very different from the 
humanist tradition that Gadamer characterizes in his 
discussion of Bildung. In a philosophically based 
research study, it is most important to call on the 
nature of the inquirer's being, as well as his or her 
culture and history, also known as the horizon in 
which s/he stands. The horizon in which one stands is 
unique to the individual and to one's involvement in a 
particular 
research 
study. 
In 
recognizing 
the 
uniqueness of the horizon in which each individual 
stands, one is opening oneself to the real possibilities 
that exist within human consciousness. 
  
There is recognition in the literature of the lack of 
examples available to guide research studies based on 
the 
philosophical 
perspective 
of 
interpretive 
hermeneutics. In response to this, Lawler (1998) 
writes: "One of the great dramas ... is making the 
transition from philosophy to methodology. In the 
case of phenomenologies, the philosophy seems to 
overpower the methodology" (p. 109). Caelli (2001), 
in similar vein, identifies two of the greatest 
challenges that face phenomenologists: "The lack of 
articulated methods in phenomenological research 
and the greater challenge of understanding the 
philosophical underpinnings" (p. 276). Caputo 
(1987), in describing hermeneutic inquiry, also 
reflects this ongoing concern with method and offers 
a cautionary insight. To remain so highly focused on 
a certain methodology, according to Caputo, makes 
science subservient to method, so that method rules 
instead of liberating. For Gadamer, a philosophical 
interpretive hermeneutic inquiry transcends the use of 
method as we have customarily come to understand it, 
and especially the way it exercises a monopoly on the 
notion of truth. Gadamer's hermeneutics serves to 
remind us of the real possibilities that exist within 
human consciousness and that a phenomenological 
approach helps to bring this into consideration. 
 
In his Truth and Method (1960/1989), Gadamer 
characterises interpretive hermeneutic inquiry as 
phenomenological in its method. By calling his 
method phenomenological he does not subscribe to 
Husserl's account of the phenomenological method, 
but aims rather to indicate that the task of the 
enterprise is descriptive; in this instance, according to 
Dostal (2002), descriptive of the hermeneutical 
human experience of understanding. Within the 
phenomenological nature of Gadamer's hermeneutics 
there is always a concern with the philosophical 
underpinnings. In addition, Gadamer emphasises the 
value in recognizing that it is not what we do or what 
we ought to do, but what happens over and above our 
wanting and doing, that is of the utmost concern in 
the hermeneutic experience of understanding.  
 
Jardine (1992) illuminates this value by explaining 
that, at the beginning of any interpretive work, there 
is a deliberate showing of questionable-ness, where 
the topic directs the character of the work. Take the 
example of a hermeneutic research approach 
involving the experience of individuals living with 
chronic illness. It is not enough to ask each individual 
"Can you explain to me what living with a chronic 
illness is like?" Each individual's understanding of an 
experience, such as living with chronic illness, has a 
deep connection with his or her history and culture. 
Therefore, to really engage in the topic, there needs to 
be a sharing of his or her experiences - a story telling 
of sorts - and it is in these stories that meaning and 
understanding are disclosed. Furthermore, it is often 
within these storied experiences that questions arise, 
and the questions serve to direct the interpretive 
dialogue. Questions that arise from the dialogue with 
the research participants are often very different from 
what the researcher envisioned prior to the encounter; 
it is the something which happens beyond the limits 
of what we may initially have wanted.   
 
In one's pursuit of a research question and a method 
of analysis, it is important to realize that the character 
of the work could be rendered something else, 
something unintended, if one's perception and 
interpretation of validity were left unchecked. One's 
choice of method determines the direction the 
research takes and the types of outcomes achieved. 
Koch and Harrington (1998) explain that we drive our 
research with our "values, histories and interests" (p. 
887). Qualitative researchers in the social sciences 
during the last two decades demonstrate a continued 
preoccupation with rigour, especially reliability and 
validity (Koch & Harrington, 1998). The result of this 
preoccupation with rigour is that much of current 
qualitative research is methodologically driven. 
Lincoln and Guba (1985) contend that we are so 
endowed with the tenets of science that we take its 
associated assumptions for granted. To remain tied to 
our inherited and culturally situated understanding of 
validity carries the risk of disregarding our own pre-
understandings and setting out on a passage created 
by a specific methodology. 
 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology, Volume 7, Edition 2 
September 2007  
Page 8 of 12 
 
 
The IPJP is a joint project of Rhodes University in South Africa and Edith Cowan University in Australia. This document is subject to 
copyright and may not be reproduced in whole or in part via any medium (print, electronic or otherwise) without the express permission of the 
publishers. 
 
The Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology (IPJP) can be found at www.ipjp.org. 
 
 
Crotty (1998), a phenomenological methodologist, 
discusses the hold our culture has on us and the way 
that it shapes how we see things. Crotty encourages 
the researcher to not remain straightjacketed by the 
conventional meanings we are taught to associate 
with our phenomena of concern. On a similar note, 
Gadamer attends to the troublesome risk that 
accompanies interpretation. To that end, he states 
that, when engaging with the individual, there must 
be a willingness to admit the limitations of our own 
understanding (Coltman, 1998, pp. ix-x).  
 
The limitations that are born from our assumptions 
can be so profound that the topic of the research no 
longer directs the character of the work. For example, 
when 
engaging 
in 
research 
concerning 
life-
threatening illnesses, the issue of validity often 
centres on those aspects of the individual's illness that 
can be quantified and controlled - features that are 
void of human context. Arthur Frank (1991) speaks 
about his experience with cancer and how, in the 
hospital setting, he was straightjacketed by the 
conventional meanings that health professionals 
applied to his particular disease. In essence, his 
disease stimulated the creation of a new version of his 
identity: he became the disease. As Frank explains, by 
being a person situated in the hospital setting he 
experienced first-hand the way his diagnosis all but 
crowded out his name, making way for him to 
become a passive object of investigation and, later, of 
treatment. Medicine's understanding of such things as 
pain, according to Frank, has little to do with the ill 
person's experience. Medicine has no interest in what 
pain means in the context of the individual's life. 
Instead, medicine sees pain only as a symptom of a 
possible disease. Yet, by all accounts, pain is about 
many things, such as disruption of relations, losing 
one's sense of place and finding another, and so forth.  
 
What Frank's narrated experiences with illness offer 
is an example of a Western notion of realism. He 
became his disease and its related categories of 
understanding. What was being validated was what 
was already understood by the health professionals, 
namely their assumptions about the general categories 
of his disease and the progress of treatment. Angen 
(2000) elucidates that "This view posits a real world 
of objects apart from the human knower. ... 
Knowledge, according to realist assumptions, must be 
obtained through an objective distance from the 
world" (p. 380). The individual and who one is in the 
context of one's life takes a back seat to one's 
disease. One becomes one's disease and this is what 
becomes the object of investigation. Validity, from 
this perspective, relies heavily on method, since 
careful specification of method is thought to be the 
only way to achieve certain knowledge. In this regard, 
the interpretivists' understanding contrasts markedly 
with more traditional understandings of truth and 
validity.  
 
Describing an interpretivist understanding of validity, 
Angen (2000) states: "Truth, from an interpretivist 
perspective, is no longer based on a one-to-one 
correspondence to objective reality. ... The social 
discourses we are engaged in, through our past and 
present interactions with the world around us, 
constantly inform and reformulate our understanding, 
our interpretations, and our claims to knowing" (p. 
386). Returning to Frank (1991), he states that 
"relationships between patients and medical staff ... 
involve people who are intimate with each other but 
rarely become intimates of each other. For a truly 
intimate relationship people need a sharing of time 
and personal history and a recognition of each other's 
differences" (p. 53). Frank's storied experience helps 
elucidate the way in which interpretive understanding 
is based on inspiration and not methodological 
calculation. Furthermore, in all attempts at and events 
of understanding, rules are not the guarantors of truth.  
 
Hermeneutic Experience as a Learning Experience 
 
Both the experience and the understanding of truth 
that Gadamer draws to our attention differ from what 
is found in everyday understanding. In addition, they 
represent an important aspect of his hermeneutics. 
When thinking about the dominant Western way of 
regarding experience, it is easy to identify that it is 
equated with a certain type of awareness. This 
awareness, however, is simply understood as a 
passive reception of sensations that is somewhat 
analogous to feeding information into a computer or 
opening a lens on a camera (Risser, 1997, p. 89). As 
much as these experiences accumulate and perhaps 
enable an individual to say "I have a broad range of 
experiences on this paricular phenomenon" [I know 
the truth], it does not transform the individual who 
has had the experience (Risser, 1997). In contrast, the 
hermeneutic experience that Gadamer brings to 
attention is more than a simple accumulation of 
experiences: it is a learning experience. When 
individuals have a learning experience they undergo a 
radical shift in their consciousness.  
 
Everyone can recall a personal learning experience. 
Take the example of experiencing the first death of a 
loved one. Although we may have had a great deal of 
experience building up an awareness of what it is like 
to lose someone very close to us, the experience of 
actually living through the loss of someone important 
to us creates a radical shift in our previous views. The 
individual is transformed in such a way that his or her 
previous views are completely negated; hence, 
Gadamer calls this a "negative dialectical experience" 
(1960/1989). After experiencing the error or partiality 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology, Volume 7, Edition 2 
September 2007  
Page 9 of 12 
 
 
The IPJP is a joint project of Rhodes University in South Africa and Edith Cowan University in Australia. This document is subject to 
copyright and may not be reproduced in whole or in part via any medium (print, electronic or otherwise) without the express permission of the 
publishers. 
 
The Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology (IPJP) can be found at www.ipjp.org. 
 
 
of our previous views, we are too experienced to re-
live the experience of believing in them (Warnke, 
1987).  
 
Gadamer identifies that what we learn through our 
life experiences transforms our earlier views, and 
after this transformation we can never return to our 
previously held views. "Gadamer calls this process a 
reversal in consciousness ... experience leads to the 
recognition that that which one previously took as the 
truth of the object under study (the 'in itself') is 
precisely that: simply that which one took as its 
'truth' (the 'in itself for us') and not its truth at all" 
(Warnke, 1987, p. 26). To be open to experience in 
this way is what Gadamer means by hermeneutic 
consciousness. 
What 
experience 
teaches 
the 
individual is that s/he does not know everything. In 
this way, there is a readiness to be radically 
undogmatic, and to be prepared to have and learn 
from new experiences (Weinsheimer, 1985). 
 
There are various ways in which we can view 
experience: it may be conceived of in terms of an end 
point, equalling knowledge, or in terms of a process, 
such as we see in hermeneutics. Experience as a 
process is what concerns us most here. Experience, 
when conceived of in a dialectical, historical, negative 
sense, stimulates a rupture between self and world. 
Hermeneutics finds its origins in this rupture 
(Weinsheimer, 1985). Illness, for that matter, 
exemplifies an experience that has the potential to 
stimulate a rupture between oneself and one's world. 
Hermeneutics offers the individual a way to respond 
to a world that no longer fits the customary order of 
things. This is where Gadamer (1960/1989) cites the 
difference 
between 
hermeneutics 
and 
research 
method: method responds to this alienation with 
alienation, and hence distance, objectivity and 
control, whereas hermeneutics seeks to understand the 
strangeness. All experiences, in the hermeneutic 
sense, are learning experiences. Our experiences 
serve to revise the way in which we understand our 
past and anticipate our future, and for that reason are 
tightly interwoven with our historic past and our 
present. The process of self-understanding, according 
to Gadamer (1960/1989), is located within the 
temporal structure of an individual's lifeworld and 
moves in a metaphorical circle of experience, 
interpretation and revision (Warnke, 1987). 
 
Experience, in the hermeneutic sense, often arises 
from disappointment. It is often during our own 
disappointing experiences that we find ourselves in a 
world that no longer fits the customary order of 
things. This experience moves each of us to discover 
quite by accident that our beliefs about the 
phenomenon of concern were, at best, questionable. 
This becomes a trigger of sorts that motivates the 
individual 
to 
start 
to 
question 
his 
or 
her 
predominantly one-sided and highly subjective 
understanding of the phenomenon in question. During 
this questioning, it is not unusual for the individual to 
notice 
how 
inadequate 
his 
or 
her 
previous 
understandings 
were. 
As 
Weinsheimer 
(1985) 
explains, in order to be able to access any 
phenomenon, such as illness, we must first destroy 
the evidence that hides it. Openness to our own 
disappointing experiences motivates this process of 
destruction, bringing into question our subjective 
understanding. The disappointing experiences serve 
to rupture a once familiar world, and it is during this 
rupture that we are moved to an experience of self-
understanding that Gadamer calls Verstehen. It "is the 
name of an experience that is strangely, yet humanly 
enough, as much a knowing as a not knowing. It is 
actually less a form of knowledge than a mode to find 
one's way around in the absence, as it were, of such a 
knowledge" (Grondin, 2000, p. 7).  
 
Finding one's way in the "absence of knowledge" 
begins with a genuine desire to engage in the active 
process of listening. It is here that individuals begin to 
share in common meaning. Heidegger (1927/1962) 
appropriately calls this the path to awakening. The 
path to awakening, Heidegger suggests, is created 
through a discourse that "makes manifest what one is 
talking about in one's discourse ... that is, it lets us 
see something from the very thing which the 
discourse is about" (p. 56). In hermeneutical research, 
the difficulty of existence is realized. Interpretive 
hermeneutics is not set on making things look easy; it 
clearly establishes the toil and trouble that is part of 
every individual's life. It recognizes that what shows 
itself, what is readily apparent, is in fact prior to the 
phenomenon as ordinarily understood. Here we are 
moved to see the difference between phenomena as 
ordinarily understood and the phenomenological 
conception of phenomena. 
 
In ordinary usage, when speaking of a phenomenon, 
what is described often relates to some characteristic 
which an entity may have. In other words, a 
phenomenon is frequently understood by means of 
those entities that are accessible through empirical 
intuition (Heidegger, 1927/1962). Phenomena, as 
ordinarily conceived, are equated with a meaning 
system that is often given to us through birth, such as 
that health is the absence of disease. On the other 
hand, 
the 
phenomenological 
understanding 
of 
phenomena asks us to be aware of our everyday 
meanings, and to open ourselves to phenomena in 
their stark immediacy, in an effort to see what 
emerges for us (Crotty, 1998, p. 82). In this light, the 
world can be viewed as a seething cauldron of 
potential meaning that is held down by our received 
notions (Crotty, 1998; Merleau-Ponty, 1945/1962). 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology, Volume 7, Edition 2 
September 2007  
Page 10 of 12 
 
 
The IPJP is a joint project of Rhodes University in South Africa and Edith Cowan University in Australia. This document is subject to 
copyright and may not be reproduced in whole or in part via any medium (print, electronic or otherwise) without the express permission of the 
publishers. 
 
The Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology (IPJP) can be found at www.ipjp.org. 
 
 
To engage with human phenomena, one must be 
willing to disclose what is enclosed, to see things in 
their immediacy, and, more importantly, to seek a 
fresh perception of the world. This, in turn, moves the 
individual toward new understanding.  
 
Conclusion 
 
Interpretive hermeneutic phenomenological research 
is not an easy endeavour. Above all else, it requires a 
commitment to engage with the philosophical 
underpinnings of interpretive phenomenology as a 
way of moving toward clarifying the conditions of 
understanding. As indicated in this paper, no method 
or set framework exists upon which researchers are 
able to rely to clarify the conditions of understanding. 
What is available is something that is present in 
varying degrees in all of us, namely a desire to 
broaden our current horizons of understanding. It is 
through openness to our own life experiences that we 
are moved to challenge our historically and culturally 
situated ways of knowing and understanding. When 
we are able to bring together the horizon of the 
known with the horizon of the unknown, we are 
prepared to experience, amongst other things, a 
shattering 
of 
prior 
ways 
of 
knowing 
and 
understanding. This can lead to what Gadamer calls a 
negative dialectical experience: we emerge from such 
experiences wiser and sometimes sadder. We realize, 
in assuming a hermeneutic stance of openness, that 
there can be no such thing as absolute truths, and that 
what we understand and know today is forever in the 
process of changing.   
 
It is within the workings of an interpretive inquiry 
that individuals realize the poverty of limiting their 
horizon of understanding to their own one-sided 
reflections. Gadamer helps each of us understand that, 
within an interpretive hermeneutic inquiry, no one 
stands above and before all others: we are all at the 
centre of inquiry. It is here that we can breathe new 
life and new insights into the phenomena of concern. 
Furthermore, it is only through dialogical engagement 
with that which we are seeking to understand that the 
importance of learning through experience emerges. 
 
The 
philosophical 
orientation 
of 
interpretive 
hermeneutic phenomenology helps one realize that a 
change in perspective does not necessarily mean a 
devaluing of the scientific method in human science 
research. Despite the limitations of the scientific 
method, everyone has greatly benefited from this 
form of inquiry, especially in the area of knowledge 
acquisition. However, the emergent trend in human 
science research recognizes that the scientific method 
alone cannot explain human experience or, more 
importantly, precipitate an understanding of it. 
Hermeneutics is a philosophical approach that can 
help the inquirer understand human phenomena in 
human science research. Reshaping understanding in 
research necessitates engagement in the science of 
interpretation. Both Heidegger and Gadamer, through 
their distinct philosophical developments, offer the 
researcher the philosophical underpinnings for more 
fully understanding the contextual, complex life of 
individuals, including those who are living with 
illness. 
 
About the Author 
 
Dr Ann Holroyd lives on Vancouver Island, Canada, and currently teaches in the BSc Nursing programme at 
Malaspina University College. In 2005, Dr Holroyd graduated with her PhD from Monash University in Australia. 
Informed by the phenomenology of Martin Heidegger and the philosophical hermeneutics of Hans-Georg Gadamer, 
her PhD thesis offered a dialogical account of what it means to live, on a day-to-day basis, with chronic illness. The 
general aim of the study was to bridge the gap that exists between the way health professionals know illness and the 
way individuals understand and experience illness. Dr Holroyd has continued to engage in research that involves 
interpretive philosophical hermeneutics. Her latest inquiry involves an exploration of one of the many challenges 
facing health professionals, which is recognizing the importance of creating a shared horizon of meaning in their 
work. More specifically, the inquiry illuminates how health professionals, as researchers, need to be aware of how 
their chosen conceptual framework creates a lens or stricture through which they come to know and understand 
individuals. Insofar as this inquiry highlights the way that the methodological approach of philosophical interpretive 
hermeneutics emphasizes that what is learned from experience extends beyond the strictures of a formalized method, 
it encourages health professionals to strive toward a middle way of thinking in the research encounter. Ann Holroyd 
is currently in the process of applying for a post-doctoral fellowship focused on interprofessional communication. 
 
 
References 
 
Allen, M., & Jensen, L. (1990). Hermeneutic inquiry: Meaning and scope. Western Journal of Nursing Research, 
12(2), 241-253. 
 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology, Volume 7, Edition 2 
September 2007  
Page 11 of 12 
 
 
The IPJP is a joint project of Rhodes University in South Africa and Edith Cowan University in Australia. This document is subject to 
copyright and may not be reproduced in whole or in part via any medium (print, electronic or otherwise) without the express permission of the 
publishers. 
 
The Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology (IPJP) can be found at www.ipjp.org. 
 
 
Angen, M. J. (2000). Evaluating interpretive inquiry: Reviewing the validity debate and opening the dialogue. 
Qualitative Health Research, 10(3), 378-396. 
 
Bauman, Z. (1978). Hermeneutics and social sciences: Approaches to understanding. London: Hutchinson. 
 
Caelli, K. (2001). Engaging with phenomenology: Is it more of a challenge than it needs to be? Qualitative Health 
Research, 11(2), 273-281. 
 
Coltman, R. (1998). The language of hermeneutics: Gadamer and Heidegger in dialogue. Albany, NY: SUNY Press. 
 
Caputo, J. (1987). Radical hermeneutics: Repetition, deconstruction and the hermeneutic project. Indianapolis, IN: 
Indiana University Press. 
 
Crotty, M. (1996). Tradition and culture in Heidegger's Being and Time. Nursing Inquiry, 4(2), 88-98. 
 
Crotty, M. (1998). The foundations of social research: Meaning and perspective in the research process. London: 
Sage Publications. 
 
Dilthey, W. (1985). Poetry and experience: Selected works (Vol. V) (R. A. Makkreel & F. Rodi, Eds.). Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press. 
 
Dostal, R. J. (2002). Gadamer's relation to Heidegger and phenomenology. In R. J. Dostal (Ed.), The Cambridge 
Companion to Gadamer (pp. 247-266). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
 
Frank, A. (1991). At the will of the body: Reflections on illness. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. 
 
Gadamer, H. G. (1977). Philosophical hermeneutics. (D. E. Linge, Ed. & Trans.). Berkeley: University of California 
Press. (Original work published in Kleine Schriften [Vols. 1-3], 1967-1972) 
 
Gadamer, H. G. (1989). Truth and method (2nd rev. ed.) (J. Weisheimer & D. Marshall, Trans.). New York: 
Continuum. (Original work published 1960) 
 
Gadamer, H. G. (1996). The enigma of health: The art of healing in a scientific age (J. Gaiger & N. Walker, Trans.). 
Stanford, California: Stanford University Press. (Original work published 1993) 
 
Geanellos, R (1998). Hermeneutic philosophy. Part 1: Implications for its use as methodology in interpretive nursing 
research. Nursing Inquiry, 5(3), 154-163. 
 
Gregory, D. (1994). The myth of control: Suffering in palliative care. Journal of Palliative Care, 10(2), 18-22.  
 
Grondin, J. (1995). Sources of hermeneutics. Albany, NY: SUNY Press. 
 
Grondin, J. (2000). Continental or hermeneutic philosophy: The tragedies of understanding in analytic and 
continental perspectives. Retrieved October 6, 2003, from http://mapageweb.umontreal.ca/grondinj/pdf/cont_ 
herm_philo.pdf 
 
Grondin, J. (2003). The philosophy of Gadamer (K. Plant, Trans.). Montreal: McGill-Queen's University Press. 
 
Heidegger, M. (1962). Being and time (J. Macquarrie & E. Robinson, Trans.). New York: Harper & Row. (Original 
work published 1927) 
 
Hughes, J., & Sharrock, W. (1997). The philosophy of social research (3rd ed.). London: Longman. 
 
Inwood, M. (1997). Heidegger. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 
Jardine, D. (1992). Speaking with a boneless tongue. Bragg Creek: Mayko Press. 
 
 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology, Volume 7, Edition 2 
September 2007  
Page 12 of 12 
 
 
The IPJP is a joint project of Rhodes University in South Africa and Edith Cowan University in Australia. This document is subject to 
copyright and may not be reproduced in whole or in part via any medium (print, electronic or otherwise) without the express permission of the 
publishers. 
 
The Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology (IPJP) can be found at www.ipjp.org. 
 
 
Jardine, D. (1998). To dwell with a boundless heart: Essays in curriculum theory, hermeneutics and the ecological 
imagination. New York: Peter Lang Publishing Inc. 
 
Koch, T. K., & Harrington, A. (1998). Reconceptualizing rigour: The case for reflexivity. Journal of Advanced 
Nursing, 28(6), 882-991.  
 
Lincoln, Y., & Guba, E. (1985). Naturalistic inquiry. Beverley Hills, CA: Sage. 
 
Laverty, S. M. (2003). Hermeneutic phenomenology and phenomenology: A comparison of historical and 
methodological considerations [Electronic version]. International Journal of Qualitative Methods, 2(3). Article 3. 
Retrieved December 10, 2004, from http://www.ualberta.ca/~ijqm/backissue/2_3final/html/laverty.html  
 
Lawler, J. (1998). Phenomenologies as research methodologies for nursing: From philosophy to researching practice. 
Nursing Inquiry, 5(2), 104-111. 
 
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1962). Phenomenology of perception (C. Smith, Trans.). New York: Routledge. (Original work 
published 1945) 
 
Moules, N. J. (2002). Hermeneutic inquiry: Paying heed to history and Hermes - ancestral, substantive, and 
methodological tale [Electronic version]. International Journal of Qualitative Methods, 1(3), Article 1. Retrieved 
December 20, 2002, from http://www.ualberta.ca/~ijqm 
  
Palmer, R. E. (1969). Interpretation theory in Schleiermacher, Dilthey, Heidegger, and Gadamer. Evanston: 
Northwestern University Press. 
 
Paterson, B. L., & Sloan, J. (1994). A phenomenological study of the decision-making experience of individuals with 
long standing diabetes. Canadian Journal of Diabetes Care, 18(4), 10-19. 
 
Risser, J. (1997). Hermeneutics and the voice of the other: Rereading Gadamer's philosophical hermeneutics. New 
York: SUNY Press. 
 
Schwandt, T. (1999). On understanding understanding. Qualitative Inquiry, 5(4), 451-465. 
 
Taylor, C. (1997). Philosophical arguments. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. 
 
Thorne, S., Nyhlin, K. T., & Paterson, B. L. (2000). Attitudes toward patient expertise in chronic illness. 
International Journal of Nursing Studies, 37(4), 303-311.  
 
Travelbee, J. (1971). Interpersonal aspects of nursing. Philadelphia: F. A. Davis. 
 
Van Manen, M. (1977). Linking ways of knowing with ways of being practical. Curriculum Inquiry, 6(3), 205-228. 
 
Warnke, G. (1987). Gadamer: Hermeneutics, tradition and reason. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. 
 
Weinsheimer, J. C. (1985). Gadamer's hermeneutics: A reading of 'Truth and method'. New Haven: Yale 
University Press. 
 
Whittemore, R. (1999). To know is to act knowledge (Analects 2, 17). Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 31(4), 365-
366. 
 
_________________ 
 

