Philosophical Explorations
An International Journal for the Philosophy of Mind and Action
ISSN: 1386-9795 (Print) 1741-5918 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rpex20
Making sense of the libertarian's semantic claim
about agential phenomenology
Andrew Sims
To cite this article: Andrew Sims (2019) Making sense of the libertarian's semantic
claim about agential phenomenology, Philosophical Explorations, 22:1, 16-32, DOI:
10.1080/13869795.2018.1506045
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13869795.2018.1506045
Published online: 02 Aug 2018.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 90
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rpex20

Making sense of the libertarian's semantic claim about agential
phenomenology
Andrew Sims*
Institut supérieur de philosophie, Université catholique de Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium
(Received 2 November 2017; ﬁnal version received 25 July 2018)
Libertarians about free will sometimes argue for their position on the grounds that
our phenomenology of action is such that determinism would need to be false for
it to be veridical. Many, however, have thought that it would be impossible for us
to have an experience that is in contradiction with determinism, since this would
require us to have perceptual experience of metaphysical facts. In this paper I
show how the libertarian claim is possible. In particular, if experience depicts the
world
such
that
there
is
more
than
one
physically
possible
future,
then
determinism would need to be false for that experience to be veridical. I show that
we have experiences, or perceptual episodes, of this kind on the basis of recent
work in the study of perception. Theorists in this area have argued that we have
vision-for-action, and that what we visually perceive are not just objects but also
possibilities for action. If we experience that it is possible that we w, then we also
experience that it is possible that we not w. Furthermore, we probably experience
more than one possibility for action at any one moment. I argue that these are
physical possibilities, and therefore that we experience the world such that there is
more than one physically possible future. So the libertarian claim about the
semantics of agential phenomenology is highly plausible, even if this does not
entail libertarianism.
Keywords: free will; incompatibilism, perception; pragmatism; agential phenomenology
One problem within the cluster of problems and concerns that is often called "the free will
problem" concerns the contents of conscious experience. The overarching question is
whether our conscious experience of being an agent (call this our agential phenomenology)
is compatible with the thesis of determinism.1 If it is, then agential phenomenology has
compatibilist content. If it does not, then it has libertarian content. It is often claimed by
libertarians that agential phenomenology has libertarian content, and that this generates a
pro tanto reason to endorse libertarianism. Probably the best known of these "phenomen-
ological" libertarians in recent times is O'Connor (1995), but the general strategy has
been discussed by various antecedents in the history of philosophy (e.g. Collins 1717;
Reid 1788; Campbell 1957). Here's the basic shape of that argument, reconstructed by
Deery as "Argument L" (2015, 319):
(1) The content of our experience of freedom is (presumptively) veridical.
(2) Our experience of freedom has libertarian content.
© 2018 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
*Email: andrew.sims@uclouvain.be
Philosophical Explorations, 2019
Vol. 22, No. 1, 16-32, https://doi.org/10.1080/13869795.2018.1506045

(3) If our experience of freedom has libertarian content, then our experience is veridical
only if libertarianism is true.
(4) So, libertarianism is (presumptively) true.
Although Deery's own strategy is to block the argument at premise 3, many compatibi-
lists (even Deery himself, see [2015, 325]) think the argument is unsound due to the falsity
of premise 2. This is the aforementioned claim about the contents of conscious experience;
it is a semantic claim. I think that the metaphysical conclusion of this argument is unwar-
ranted, but I think that the semantic claim has unfairly been given short shrift by compatibi-
lists (e.g. Holton 2006; 2009). In this paper, I explain why I think that the semantic claim is
plausible and should be endorsed.
The compatibilist objection against the semantic claim rests on the supposition that the
content in question is metaphysical in nature (that we act freely, and that we act freely is
incompatible with determinism). And it has seemed implausible to many commentators
that our perceptual processes are capable of delivering knowledge about metaphysical
phenomena. Here's Holton (2006, 5) expressing this line of thought: "[...] our experiences
might reveal something about our psychology, but they will not reveal the ultimate causal
structure of the world." The general idea here is that the semantic claim attributes powers of
insight to our perceptual processes that it is very unlikely that they have.
My argument against this objection relies upon recent work in the study of percep-
tion. In particular it relies upon the view, introduced into psychology by Gibson (1979),
that we sometimes perceive possibilities for action ("affordances") in a way that cannot
be reduced to the perception of objects or environmental features. Although Gibson's
view is not usually endorsed in its original and radical form, there are certain lessons
from Gibson that have become widespread, such that it has become common to
endorse what I call a "modest pragmatism" (or something stronger) about perception.
On this view, perception is at least partially action-oriented in the sense that what we
perceive at some moment is partly constituted by how it is possible for us to act at
that moment. I will be showing that modest pragmatism about perception entails that
we perceive possibilities for action in addition to objects and non-modal properties.
But it is a long way from there to the view that agential phenomenology is libertarian.
I make the argument in three parts.
In the ﬁrst, I do some groundwork in establishing some conditions that an experience
would need to satisfy in order to count as having libertarian content. It is the hallmark of
libertarian theories of free will that they contradict determinism. So if there is an experience
that has libertarian content then that experience will present the world to us as though deter-
minism is false. Determinism as deﬁned by Van Inwagen (1983) is substantive and entails
many other propositions. One of these propositions is that there only exists one physically
possible future. So, by modus tollens, if we experience the world as having more than one
physically possible future then the satisfaction conditions of that content will be in contra-
diction with determinism. And so if we have such an experience within our agential phe-
nomenology then we will be able to conclude that our agential phenomenology has
libertarian satisfaction conditions.
In the second, I review the evidence for the theory that we consciously perceive modal
properties of a kind which would be appropriate to an experience of the kind considered in
part one. I do this in three section. First, I outline the view I call "modest pragmatism": it is a
view on which perception is inferential, representational, action-oriented, and includes
affordances. Then I rehearse the empirical evidence for holding a view of this kind.
Finally, I make some remarks about the relationship between conscious experience and
Making sense of the libertarian's semantic claim about agential phenomenology
17

perception. I will argue that the idea of phenomenal consciousness is accidental to the force
of Argument L.
Finally, I show that the perceived modal properties that I describe and argue for in
the second part meets the conditions that I specify in the ﬁrst part. If we perceive a
possibility for action we experience one possible way in which the future could be. If
we experience that it is possible that we w, then we also experience that it is possible
that we not w. That means that we experience that there is more than one physically
possible way in which the future could be, and so we have an agential phenomenology
that is in prima facie contradiction with determinism (since the latter entails that there is
only one physically possible future). I consider three objections to this semantic
interpretation of an experience or perception of an affordance. Then in the conclusion
I draw some limits as to what can be inferred from the view that our agential phenom-
enology is libertarian.
1.
Determinism and the very idea of a libertarian experience
Libertarianism is the view that there exist events of the following kind, where x is an agent
and w is an action:
(LE) x decides to w, and that x decides to w is undetermined by her prior states together with the
laws of nature.
It has seemed to many that the very idea of a libertarian experience is implausible, because it
is unlikely that we could experience LE, or even know that we had experienced LE: "[...]
how could anyone's experience have as content that her deciding to A is undetermined by
her prior states together with the laws of nature?" (Deery 2015, 325) The basic insight is
that to have an experience of LE would require us to have immediate access to facts that
are beyond our perceptual capacities. I agree with this basic insight. However, I do not
think that means that we could never have an experience that is in contradiction with
determinism.
I aim to establish this on the basis of Van Inwagen's inﬂuential deﬁnition of determin-
ism. Van Inwagen's (1983, 65) deﬁnition is as follows:
(D) If p and q are any propositions that express the state of the world at some instants, then the
conjunction of p with the laws of nature entails q.
Here, it is assumed that p is antecedent to q, so that a proposition expressing the state of
the world at some instant, in conjunction with the laws of nature, entails another proposition
expressing the state of the world at a future instant. The deﬁnition includes two further
assumptions: ﬁrst, that is possible in principle that the total state of the world at some
instant could be expressed in a proposition; second, that the laws of nature are exceptionless
(otherwise the entailment relation could not hold).
Any of these may be disputed, and an alternative deﬁnition of determinism given. So
why do I rely on van Inwagen, which requires me to uncritically take a stand on those meta-
physical issues? I do so because van Inwagen's deﬁnition is without question the hegemo-
nic one in the free will literature. It might be objected that I am therefore just being dogmatic
with respect to what is given in the literature. But that need not be so. Take my argument in
this paper as conditional on the acceptance of D. If one ﬁnds my conclusion implausible but
the reasoning sound, then it may be (by modus tollens) that the hegemony of D is
18
Andrew Sims

unwarranted, and that we should be using another deﬁnition of determinism. That is still an
important result.
D has as a consequence that there is only one physically possible future. This is the
thesis that the future is physically unique. Physical possibility is to be distinguished from
both nomic and metaphysical possibility. An physically possible event is one that is com-
patible with proposition p and the laws of nature. A nomically possible event is one that is
compatible with the laws of nature. A metaphysically possible event need not be compatible
with p nor the laws of nature. The events that are physically possible are a proper subset of
the events that are nomically possible, and the events that are nomically possible are a
proper subset of the events that are metaphysically possible.
Critics have claimed that it is implausible that I could have an experience, and know that
I am having an experience, of an event of kind LE. However, the unique future thesis means
that there are other sorts of experience that might have content that is in contradiction with
determinism (qua D). More speciﬁcally, I will be having an experience that is in contradic-
tion with determinism if I have an experience whose content is that more than one future is
physically possible.
It is important that the possibility in question is physical, rather than merely nomic or
metaphysical. That is because D does not preclude that there are multiple futures that are
nomically or metaphysically possible. In a deterministic world where q is true, it is none-
theless nomically possible that not-q, since it could be the case that not-q if p had been
different. That is to say that not-q is compatible with the laws of nature. Likewise, in the
same deterministic world, it is metaphysically possible that there is a future incompatible
with both p and the laws of nature - a future in which faster-than-light travel is widespread,
for example. So an experience of either metaphysically or nomically possible futures would
not be incompatible with determinism.
A libertarian experience would be an experience whose content is that more than one
future is physically possible. How could we distinguish an experience of physical possi-
bility from an experience of nomic, or of metaphysical possibility? My answer to this is
that it is only physical possibilities that are plausible contents of experience. For us to
experience a metaphysical possibility (that is also not physical) would require that we
experience something that requires the falsity of the laws of nature, and for us to experience
a nomic possibility (that is also not physical) would require that the past is different than
what it is. So both metaphysical and nomic possibilities are impossible contents of experi-
ence. With this much said, I accept that many readers will still have misgivings on this ques-
tion. I return to it at the end of the paper when the entire argument has been put into place
and I can address it more thoroughly.
Next, it is important that this apprehension of physical possibility be a bona ﬁde experi-
ence and not a non-experiential or non-perceptual judgment. On the assumption of D, it
would not be surprising that we can judge that more than one future is physically possible.
Probably very many of our non-experiential judgments are false, particularly those on phi-
losophical matters. Furthermore, non-experiential judgment is normatively reasons-respon-
sive in a way that makes it uncompelling as a pro tanto basis for libertarianism. That we
judge that the world is a certain way is not a good reason to think that it actually is that
way. Rather, we look to the reasons on the basis of which we judge. Normatively speaking,
the bare fact that we judge thusly is irrelevant to the justiﬁcation of that same judgment.2
It would carry more epistemic import were we to experience that there is more than one
physically possible future because experience or experiential judgment is self-evidencing in
a way that non-experiential judgment is not. That is to say that, although an experience may
be doubted, that we experience something is a good pro tanto reason to think that the
Making sense of the libertarian's semantic claim about agential phenomenology
19

satisfaction conditions of the experience obtain. In O'Connor's (1995, 197) words, "[...] do
we not properly assume, in the absence of strong countervailing reasons, that things are
pretty much the way they appear to us?" That is in stark contrast to "mere" judgement:
we should not assume, in the absence of countervailing reasons, that things are pretty
much the way we judge them to be, unless we have additional reasons to judge thusly.
In other words, that we have a judgment does not count as evidence for that same judgment.
With all this in place, we are ready to specify the kind of experience that would be
necessary for an experience of libertarian free will, and which could plausibly be a
content of experience:
(LE*) At some time t, it is physically possible that x performs w, and it is also physically poss-
ible that x not perform w.
The satisfaction conditions of this experience are in contradiction with D, because this is an
experience of there being more than one physically possible future. Yet to have such an
experience would not require us to have conceptually "intricate" experiences in Holton's
(2006) sense - metaphysically loaded perceptual experiences. It would just require that
we have experiences that include modal contents in a certain kind of way. In fact, I
believe that we often have experiences like these in our agential phenomenology. In the fol-
lowing section I show why you should believe this too.
2.
Affordances and modal properties in perception
Two ideal-types can be used to describe a range of theories of perception. These are the
ideal-types of constructivism and pragmatism. On the constructivist picture perception is
understood in terms of a subject constructing an optimally accurate and detailed picture
of the causes of sensory impingements on the model of a passive observer who is trying
to build a full picture of the scene in front of her. The pragmatist rather understands percep-
tion in terms of the relationship in which it stands to action - perception is understood to be
action-oriented in a sense which precludes it being understood in the manner suggested by
the constructivist. Both ideal-types are caricatures. But they are useful in allowing us to
consider a range of different types from which the best theory of perception might ulti-
mately be selected.
The constructivist strain in theorizing about perception has been the dominant one until
recent pragmatist challenges (e.g. Gibson 1979; O'Regan and Noë 2001; Cisek and Kalaska
2010; many more). It has several distinctive features. The ﬁrst of these is that perception is
construed as an inferential process from sensation to the causes of sensation. This basic idea
may be developed in several ways. For example, in recent Bayesian theories of perception,
perception comprises the prediction of sensory states (like patterns of retinal stimulation)
based on a model of the causes of those states. When the model is unable to predict
sensory states accurately, those states produce prediction errors that propagate up
through the network and cause Bayesian updating of the priors in the model (Rao and
Ballard 1999). Those updated priors are used to better infer the causes of sensation in future.
The second basic idea in constructivism is that perception is a representational process.
This idea is closely tied to the notion of perception as inference. To perceive the world is to
build up a representation of the way the world is, rather than to be in touch with it directly.
In this context, representations are conceived as physical particulars (for example, patterns
of neural activation) which are isomorphic to entities in the world, and which can be used as
a common currency in cognitive operations (cf., Shea 2013). In the Bayesian example, these
20
Andrew Sims

representations are the prior beliefs and predictions that comprise the model of the causes of
sensory states. Representation is closely linked to inference on this account because it is
hard to see how inference could take place without some representational system within
which the inference takes place.
The third theme of constructivism is the idea that perception is functionally isolated
from action. One way to develop this idea is through instrumental versus constitutional
dependence (Briscoe and Grush 2017). Speciﬁcally, it is the view that perception
depends on action in a way that is merely instrumental. What that means is that the only
role that action plays vis-à-vis perception is getting the sensory organs into a spatial position
to receive information that it otherwise wouldn't. For example, I may turn my head in order
that I can see out the window. But nothing about that action determines what I see in any
more than an instrumental fashion; that would contrast with a view on which activity partly
constitutes the contents of perception in a more direct fashion, a view I will discuss shortly.
The last feature of this constructivist ideal-type is that it is objects and properties which
are perceived entities. When we infer the nature of the world through perception, what we
represent are objects to which we assign properties. In visual perception, these would typi-
cally be gestalt properties like shape, colour, and spatial position. The important point is that
they are objects and properties that have an existence independent of any properties of the
perceiver. To summarise: the constructivist ideal-type is a theory of perception on which it
is inferential, representational, isolated from action, and which takes objects and properties
as its data.
The pragmatist ideal-type involves the negation of these four features. Firstly, an ideal
pragmatist about perception thinks that it is direct rather than inferential. This means that
perception is not a process of inference across an epistemic boundary but rather a
manner of direct contact with the world. Perception is an epistemically-rewarding relation
between the subject and the world that does not necessarily require any sort of inference.
Second, the ideal pragmatist demurs from constructivism on the topic of representation.
Inference can only take place within a representational system, but if perception is a direct
relation between a subject and the world then there is no need for any such system. A con-
sistent theme in pragmatist theories of perception is the repudiation of representation as an
explanatory notion in the theory of perception, out of a desire to maintain perception as a
direct relation and also because they claim that there are insoluble philosophical problems
that come packaged with the notion.
Third, in an ideal pragmatist theory of perception, perception is action-oriented. That
means that perception constitutively depends on action. Perception is constitutively depen-
dent on action if and only if what we perceive is non-instrumentally determined by the way
we are acting, or by ways in which it is possible for us to act. Here's an example: Gibson
(1979) thought that what we perceive is partly determined by our abilities, so that two
agents with different sorts of abilities would have different perceptual experiences when
confronted with the same environment. If I can climb stairs but another perceiver cannot,
then what I perceive when I see the stairs will be different than that of the other perceiver.
Finally, and in close relation to the previous point, the pragmatist ideal-type theory has a
distinct view about the entities which are perceived. These are not the objects and properties
of constructivism, but rather something that Gibson (1979) called affordances. An affor-
dance is a possibility for action which exists in virtue of an ability and a feature. The
ability is possessed by the perceiver and the feature is something in the environment. For
example, I have the possibility to grasp an object in virtue of both the shape of the
object and the structure and functionality of my hand. According to Gibson, we perceive
Making sense of the libertarian's semantic claim about agential phenomenology
21

the affordances that abilities and features make possible, rather than just environmental fea-
tures qua properties or objects.
Affordances are importantly distinct from those entities that are perceived on the ideal
constructivist theory because they are not agent-independent in the same way as objects and
properties are. That is because the existence of the affordance depends on the abilities of the
creatures which perceive it. If I were not able to move with a speciﬁc kind of locomotion,
then I would not be able to perceive a set of steps as affording climbing. That is because
they would not afford climbing at all, at least not for me.
Both ideal-types are caricatures; I will rehearse some reasons to think that the best
theory of perception combines elements from both types. We can call this more realistic
view "modest pragmatism" about perception. On modest pragmatism, perception has the
following features: it is inferential3, representational, action-oriented, and the entities
which are perceived are both objects and properties as well as affordances. On a modestly
pragmatic view about perception, it is plausible to think that in perception we represent
modal properties as part of the world.
Modest pragmatism takes the lessons of ideal-type pragmatism and recuperates them
within a broadly representational framework. The basic features of this framework are
that perception is both inferential and representational. The primary reason for holding
on to these two constructivist features is that they allow us to make sense of misrepresenta-
tion in perception. If perception is direct, then it is hard to see how it is that we could ever
get things wrong in perception - though we clearly often do, for example in visual illusions.
Likewise, it would be difﬁcult to make sense of mental imagery in the absence of stimuli
altogether, as is arguably the case in dreaming and in some forms of hallucination.
However, modest pragmatism maintains that perception is action-oriented, and that it
includes affordances as entities. These two commitments are closely related, since if affor-
dances are perceived then perception is at least partly constitutively dependent upon action.
That is because affordances themselves are constitutively dependent upon what it is poss-
ible for the agent to do. So if I perceive affordances, then what I perceive in some moment
depends on what possibilities for action I have available to me at that time.
To see the way that modest pragmatism about perception manifests in the neuroscience
of vision, consider the ground breaking work of Goodale and Milner (1992). They draw on
earlier work in the neuroanatomy of vision demonstrating that the visual system is com-
posed of two pathways - ventral and dorsal. Both of this pathways begin at the retina
but diverge soon after. The ventral pathway represents properties like shape, colour, and
orientation while the dorsal pathway represents spatial position. Goodale and Milner
hypothesise that these two pathways can be classiﬁed as vision-for-perception and
vision-for-action. They call this the Two Visual Systems Hypothesis.
In support of this hypothesis, they cite studies performed with Patient DF, who devel-
oped an impaired ability to perceive the shape of objects after brain damage caused by
carbon monoxide poisoning. DF cannot identify objects on the basis of their shape, and
cannot identify geometric ﬁgures in general, though her ability to perceive other low-
level visual properties (e.g. colour) remains unaffected. Despite this impairment, DF is
able to use visual information about shape in order to perform certain tasks: she is able
to correctly orient her wrist in order to pass a card through a slot, and she also uses an appro-
priate grasp (distance between thumb and ﬁnger) in order to pick up differently shaped
wooden blocks. This dissociation suggests that visual information about shape is available
for action although it is not available for report.
One natural interpretation of this distinction between the dorsal and ventral visual
streams is that the function of the dorsal pathway is to visually perceive affordances,
22
Andrew Sims

while the function of the ventral pathway is to perceive objects and properties. This ﬁts well
with the distinction in function for either sort of information, and would be reﬂected in the
representational format of each stream. In contrast to the ventral stream, the dorsal would
need to represent information in an agent-centred frame of reference, seeing as that the func-
tion of that stream is to provide information for the coordination of action. That is the sort of
representational format one would expect for the representation of affordances, since what
needs to be represented in that case is in part dependent on the agent and her abilities. In the
ventral stream, on the other hand, the frame of reference ought to lack this egocentricity,
since the function of this stream is to track perceptual constancies that are agent-indepen-
dent. Of course, this does not entail that all affordances can be perceived by the dorsal
pathway. For example, there may exist affordances which the dorsal pathway is incapable
of detecting because they are only detectable via cues that are more visually sophisticated.
For example, if the edibility of a piece of fruit is indicated by its colour, then the dorsal
pathway - which is not central in processing colour - may not be able to detect this
edibility.4
It must be said that in the initial report of their ﬁndings, Goodale and Milner overem-
phasised the distinctness of the ventral and dorsal streams. But as those authors themselves
now avow, there is evidence to think that there are important interactions between them
(Milner 2017). This evidence is of two kinds. First, there is evidence to show that there
is ventral-to-dorsal trafﬁc. For example, although DF can perform very many manual
tasks with the same competence as a healthy subject, she cannot perform similar manual
tasks that require more complex visual analysis or that involves a delay between the pres-
entation of a stimulus and the corresponding action. That suggests that the dorsal stream
integrates "high-resolution" visual information from the ventral stream in order to complete
certain actions that require it. Second, there is evidence demonstrating dorsal-to-ventral
trafﬁc. For example, it appears that patients who cannot detect an object from an array
on the basis of its ﬁne-grained visual properties can nonetheless detect it on the basis of
what it affords; i.e. the kind of motor program that would be required to interact with it
(Humphreys and Riddoch 2001). There is also evidence to suggest that information from
the dorsal stream contributes information about spatial depth to processing in the ventral
stream (Milner 2017).
So, we have good empirical reasons to think that perception is modestly pragmatic.
Most importantly, it is both action-oriented and takes affordances as perceived entities.
We should believe that it takes affordances as its entities because the dorsal visual
stream is responsive to task-speciﬁc features of stimuli without necessarily processing
action-independent constancies like size, shape, and colour. Likewise, and despite the ten-
dency of equating the ventral stream with visual perception that is available to awareness, it
seems a mistake to say that affordances are not part of the conscious outputs of perception.
That is because the dorsal and ventral systems are not segregated in the way that would be
required for this to be possible: it appears that representations of what actions are possible
contributes to our perceptual awareness of the immediate environment.
Modest pragmatism about perception entails that modal properties are part of the data of
perception. In particular, it militates against a view of these data which we might call the
"Humean view." According to the Humean view, all that we perceive are properties that
can be described in a ﬁrst-order logic. More particularly, on this view we cannot perceive
the properties described by modal logics. It implies that attributions of possibility are exer-
cises of judgment rather than deliverances of perception. A modestly pragmatic view of per-
ception would challenge this Humean view, by providing a premise in an argument that
some entities that cannot be described in ﬁrst order logic are represented in perceptual
Making sense of the libertarian's semantic claim about agential phenomenology
23

processes. This representation of modality is necessitated by the role that abilities play in
what is represented in perception. Affordances are represented in perception, and affor-
dances are partly constituted by agent abilities: what it is possible for the agent to do.
There is an objection that can be raised at this point which trades on a claim about the
phenomenology of perception. The claim is that we do not have modal properties as part of
the phenomenology of perception; we do not experience the world as containing possibili-
ties. Rather, the critic will say - and in a direct appeal to introspection - that modest prag-
matism is in contradiction with our perceptual phenomenology. This may mean othat
affordances are represented in perception, but they never become conscious. In this case,
it would be wrong to say that modal properties are part of the content of conscious experi-
ence, even if they are part of the content of perception.
I should therefore say something at this point about the relationship between perception
and conscious experience. Now, insofar as it makes sense to speak about unconscious per-
ception, there may be entities that we perceive but which we do not consciously experience.
One example of this might be the phenomenon of "blindsight", in which persons are able to
discriminate visual stimuli without conscious awareness (Weiskrantz 1996). Indeed, the
card and slot experiment involving DF can be seen as such a case. DF reports lack of con-
scious awareness of geometrical properties of the slot, but can discriminate those properties
to the extent required to pass a card through that slot. In this case, isn't a critic of my view
right to say that even if affordances are perceived we are not permitted to say that they are
part of conscious experience?
There are two points I would like to make in response to this line of thought. The ﬁrst
involves the ﬁndings regarding blindsight, and in particular the relationship between con-
sciousness and the Two Visual Systems Hypothesis. That is, it's not obviously correct to say
that people with blindsight are completely unconscious of the relevant percepts. For
example, if consciousness is a graded notion then perhaps it is more correct to say that con-
sciousness of the percept is only very dim or sparse compared to ordinary visual experience.
Sahraie et al. (2010) describe what they call "type II" blindsight, where the blindsight
patient has a "feeling" of some visually perceived event in the absence of a fully blown
visual experience. It may be that the perception of affordances by the dorsal stream contrib-
utes to part of the conscious visual experience in a similar way, and this is a live issue in the
literature.5 But even if one is not willing to commit oneself to such a view, the notion of
consciousness is not necessarily integral to the argument I am discussing.
This second point takes us back to Argument L itself. As it stands, Argument L was
structured around the notion of conscious experience, but this is not obligatory. That is
because a similar case can be made using perception as the operative notion. Call this Argu-
ment L*:
(1) The content of our perceptual episodes is (presumptively) veridical.
(2) Our affordance-involving perceptual episodes have libertarian content.
(3) If our affordance-involving perceptual episodes have libertarian content, then affor-
dance-involving perception is veridical only if libertarianism is true.
(4) So, libertarianism is (presumptively) true.6
The premises are analogous to those in Argument L, except that they concern perceptual
episodes instead of conscious experiences. Presumably the original notion of an "conscious
experience" has at least two components: (i) an intentionality, such that the experience is of
something; and (ii) a phenomenality or "raw feel" which constitutes the phenomenal con-
scious-related part of the notion. A perceptual episode is simply this without component (ii).
24
Andrew Sims

This allows that we can have perceptual episodes that are not phenomenally conscious, as
some people have claimed occurs in blindsight. I do not see why the presumptive veridical-
ity of conscious experiences relies in any way on (ii). What is important here is that percep-
tual episodes are pro tanto self-evidencing in the way that cognitive judgments are not. That
is because perceptual episodes are by their nature a generally reliable indicator of their
causes, even if they are not infallible.
Rather, the salient difference that might be thought important for the argument lies else-
where: in the fact that our knowledge of the relevant perceptual episodes comes from the
cognitive science of vision, rather than from the ﬁrst-person knowledge of our own con-
scious experiences.7 Does this matter for the argument? Again, I cannot see why. In the
case of these affordance-involving perceptual episodes, we are one epistemic step
removed from them, because we don't have direct access to these in the way that we
have direct access to phenomenally-conscious perceptual episodes. But that is not relevant
for the relationship between their content and their causes, which is one of reliable
indication.
The second premise of Argument L* is just a statement of the premise for which I am
arguing in this paper. I do not take myself to have sufﬁciently established this until I prop-
erly discuss the content of affordance-involving perceptual episodes (or conscious experi-
ences). I do that now.
3.
Agential phenomenology has libertarian satisfaction conditions
I've presented a few different reasons to think that affordances are part of our phenomen-
ology, our perceptual episodes, or both of these.8 Certainly, I think that the view is plausible
enough to consider the consequences that it might have for libertarian arguments that are
based on the experience of action. That is what I do in this section of the paper. I will be
arguing that if we consciously experience or perceive affordances, then conscious experi-
ences or perceptual episodes which include affordances as part of their content satisfy
LE*. That means that those experiences are in contradiction with determinism, and there-
fore that our agential phenomenology has libertarian satisfaction conditions. Determinism
would need to be false for those satisfaction conditions to obtain. (I remain agnostic on the
question of whether they do obtain, but say more about this in the conclusion.)
In order to successfully argue this point, however, I need to remove some doubts about
the semantic content of affordance-involving experiences or perceptual episodes. The
interpretation I want to give with respect to the content of an affordance-involving percep-
tual episode is as follows.
When I perceive an affordance at a moment, I perceive something that it is physically
possible for me to do. For example, when I am walking my bike I perceive the bike as being
rideable for me at that moment. I perceive the world as being such that I could ride that bike.
However, if I perceive that it is possible that I w, then I also perceive that it is possible that I
not w. That is because to say that something is physically possible is to say that it could
happen. But not everything that could happen actually happens. So that w is possible
also entails that not-w is possible.
So when I consciously perceive an affordance I am consciously perceiving two physical
possibilities: I am perceiving that it is possible that I w and also that it is possible that I not w.
So when I have an experience of my bike as rideable at any given moment I am perceiving
the world as if there are two physically possible ways in which the future can unfold: that I
ride the bike, and also that I not ride the bike. So I am perceiving that the world contains
more than one physically possible future. In other words, I have an experience of type
Making sense of the libertarian's semantic claim about agential phenomenology
25

LE*. An experience of type LE* is incompatible with determinism. So our agential phe-
nomenology has libertarian satisfaction conditions.
Of course, one can anticipate objections to this interpretation:
3.1.
Affordances do not have modal content
Firstly, one can deny the claim that an affordance-involving perceptual episode has modal
content. What is happening when I see a particular possibility for action, for instance when I
see a wall as climbable? Perhaps we can give a reductive semantics of this episode on which
its content involves either a conditional or means-end relation, but no modal content.
Maybe the content is something like this: if I move like so, then I will climb the wall.
Put slightly differently, maybe it is something like this: one's moving like so is a means
for climbing the wall. We can generalise from these accounts and suggest the following:
an affordance-involving perceptual episode does not involve the perception of possibilities
for action, but rather involves the perception of a modally-thin relation between oneself (or
one's goals) and an object or feature in the environment.
Of course, on a certain reductive view of affordances this are simply what affordances are.
However, there is a problem with such a view which is pointed out by Tillas et al. (2017). Tillas
and his co-authors remind us that affordances are a concept which were introduced in order to
explain certain sorts of behaviours without appealing to perception and action as sequential
stages requiring the manipulation of syntactically-structured states (e.g. in some kind of Fodor-
ian [1975] "language of thought") to match appropriate actions to stimuli. Therefore, whatever
semantics of affordances we come up with must respect this explanatory demand.
Tillas et al. (2017) argue that this demand can only be satisﬁed if the content of the affor-
dance includes a direct link to the agent (perhaps, they suggest, through a Perry (1979) style
"essential indexical"). That is because any agent that perceives the affordance needs to see
the action-possibility as self-involving. If the agent does not, then there is no reason that
perceiving the affordance would lead to the action or behaviour, unless it were made a
premise in a practical syllogism along with another premise containing the essential index-
ical. But then, this is the very input-output picture of cognition that the affordance-based
view of perception was introduced to avoid. Furthermore, Tillas et al. (2017) state, such
a cognitively sophisticated picture makes less sense for pre-verbal infants and perhaps
non-verbal animals, making the scope of the view rather limited.
Similarly, it seems to me that affordance-involving perceptual episodes need to include a
modal component in order to serve their explanatory raison d'être. That is because the per-
ceptual episode needs not just to involve a relation between a feature and the agent, but also
involve an interaction between the agent and the environment that this relation makes poss-
ible. Furthermore, the representation needs to be such that it is action-guiding. That is why
authors in this area (e.g. Chemero 2003) usually treat affordances as a relation between a
feature and a relevant ability. It is the ability that produces the action. However, abilities
are not modally innocent. They themselves involve "agentive modality" in the sense of
"can." An affordance-involving perceptual episode must be seen as episode where a
feature is perceived in light of such a possibility. It is not clear how an affordance can be con-
strued as a means-end relation or conditional relation without this link to agentive modality,
because without it, it could not be action-guiding, and therefore could not explain behaviour.
3.2.
Affordances have modal content, but the possibility in question is not physical
But now, how do we know that the possibilities in question are physical possibilities? Cer-
tainly I have many nomically and metaphysically possible actions that are available to me at
26
Andrew Sims

any given moment, but this fact is not in contradiction with determinism. So in order to
make my case that the perception of two possibilities for action is truly an experience of
type LE*, I must show that these are most plausibly construed as physical possibilities.
My answer: the reason that these cannot be nomic nor metaphysical possibility is that
these entities are not plausible contents of conscious experience. In other words: how
would I be able to have an experience of something as non-physically possible, rather
than just judging it to be so?
A nomic possibility is something that is compatible with the laws of nature, and a nomic
possibility that is also not a physical possibility is something that is compatible with the
laws of nature, had the past been different than it is. When it comes to nomic possibilities,
the point made by authors like Holton (2006) and Deery (2015) becomes acute: why would
our perceptual processes be able to have as its content an experience which entails that the
past is different than it is? The past has already been settled by the time we have the experi-
ence. So it seems that we are justiﬁed in ruling out nomic possibilities (that are not also
physical) as plausible contents of conscious experience.
A metaphysical possibility is something that is incompatible with the laws of nature -
for example, the possibility of faster-than-light travel. This is similarly implausible as a
content of conscious experience, because it would require us to experience something
that is physically impossible: an event which contradicts the laws of nature. If we do
have epistemic access to metaphysically possible events, it is highly unlikely that this epis-
temic access is given through our visual perception! Visual perception, after all, delivers
facts about the actual physical world. Barring the existence of tachyons, the existence of
faster-than-light travel is not part of the actual physical world.9 So metaphysical possibili-
ties are not plausible contents of perception. That just leaves physical possibilities.
Perhaps a critic can respond to this line of thought by claiming that the possibility in
question is underspeciﬁed, in the sense of Kratzer (1977).10 Kratzer has argued that
modal operators in natural language, like the word "can," do not have a determinate seman-
tics outside of a particular context of use. Therefore, we cannot say what kind of modality is
implied by such an operator prior to its employment in an expression which contains an
implicit scope-restricting clause like "Given what we know about diseases [it is possible
that you have the virus]" or "Given the laws of nature [it is possible that I could have
done otherwise]."
Could the possibility involved in the perception of affordances be like this? If it were, it
would be incorrect to take the content of an affordance-involving perceptual episode as
incompatible with determinism. That is because the possibility involved in the modal
content of such an episode would be underspeciﬁed: it would not be restricted in the
sense required for physical possibility, since it would be lacking a scope-restricting
clause. However, I think a Kratzerian treatment is implausible in this context, for two
reasons.
The ﬁrst is that Kratzer's account aims to be a theory of modal operators in natural
language, but the content of affordance-involving perceptual episodes is probably not lin-
guistic. As I mentioned in the previous section, affordances were introduced in order to
explain behaviour without positing propositional attitudes that enter into inference-like
transitions in order to match actions to stimuli. Furthermore, the affordance-based view
of perception is supposed to apply not just to human adults but to creatures which do
not use language, like non-human animals and pre-verbal infants. The content in question
is non-conceptual and lacks syntactic structure. It is not linguistic.
The second reason is that the context in the case of affordance-involving perceptual epi-
sodes is always the same. In natural language, what determines the implicit scope-
Making sense of the libertarian's semantic claim about agential phenomenology
27

restricting clause is the context of use. If I use the word "can" in one context it may imply an
epistemic notion, and if I use it in another it may imply a metaphysical notion. However,
perception lacks such contexts of use - or better said, it is always subject to the same
kind of context. In particular, affordance-involving perceptual episodes always take place
within a context where the aim of the perceptual system is to determine if it is possible
for me to do something. So Kratzer's celebrated treatment of modality in natural language
shouldn't be applied here.
3.3.
Perceiving ◊w does not entail that I perceive ◊¬w
Here's an objection to the argument I've just given: the perception of a possibility for action
is not an experience of type LE*, because it does not comprise the perception of two poss-
ible futures. Rather, it comprises the perception of one possible future (the actual future)
along with the cognitive judgment that another future is possible. Here's how that works:
I perceive that it is possible that I ride the bike, and then I judge that since it is possible
that I do ride, it is also possible that I don't. That's to say that the second possibility is
not perceived along with the ﬁrst, but rather inferred on the basis of the ﬁrst. So there's
no LE* type experience here.
I think we should hesitate to endorse this gloss of the situation because affordance-
involving perceptual episodes are supposed to be non-conceptual and lack syntactic struc-
ture. This rules out the sort of process detailed above. To see why, consider what would be
required for it to take place. First, the representational content ◊w would need to be syn-
tactically decomposed into the components ◊and w. Then w, the component representing
the action, would need to be negated to yield ¬w, and then recombined with the modal oper-
ator to yield the judgment that ◊¬w. Given their primitiveness, it is very unlikely that the
content of affordance-involving perceptual episodes can be syntactically decomposed in
such a way. Any such judgment would therefore need to be a negation of the total
content. However, that yields ¬◊w, which is that a particular action is impossible.
But for the sake of argument let us grant the force of the objection. Even so, I can still
argue that there are experiences of type LE*. That is because it is likely that we perceive
more than one affordance at any one moment. Objects that are in the appropriate proximity
and spatial orientation to an agent will be perceived with the corresponding affordances.
This seems clear: more generally speaking, we can perceive multiple properties at once -
I can see a ball as both red and round - so why would things be any different with
action-properties? If this is the case, it is an experience of type LE*, but it is one in
which the possibility that the agent perform not-w is replaced by the possibility that the
agent performs an alternative action.
One can give a ﬁnal objection at this point. If I perceive two affordances at a single
moment, then this does not by itself entail that I perceive that both possibilities for
action are possible at the same moment. Perhaps, for instance, I perceive that these
actions are possible without any speciﬁcation of a time. The non-determinacy would
only be present if I perceive (say) that this branch affords-climbing at t and affords-grasping
at t. What's to say that when I perceive two affordances that I perceive two simultaneous
possibilities for action?
But I can respond by noting that most authors in this area claim that the perception of
affordances has a "here-and-now" centred structure. Chemero (2003), one of the most
highly cited authors on this topic, explains this in terms of Strawson (1959) "feature
placing." Feature-placing sentences like "It is raining" do not predicate a property of an
object but rather afﬁrm a feature of the present situation. Most theorists of affordances
28
Andrew Sims

think that the perception of affordances is indexical or context-bound in just this sort of way.
So if I perceive two affordances at a moment then I am perceiving two possibilities for
action that both (fallibly) hold at that same moment.
4.
Conclusion
Extant arguments against the possibility of a libertarian experience are far too quick. But -
and just anecdotally speaking - I ﬁnd that very many people are convinced by them. Poss-
ibly this is why they aren't often rigorously developed in the academic context, but merely
gestured at; they aren't considered to be a serious matter of controversy. However, I hope
it's clear by now that they should be. In particular, just because we could not have a direct
apprehension of a certain metaphysical thesis as false (i.e. determinism), does not mean that
there could not be certain experiences in which the world is represented in a way that is in
tension with that thesis.
Let me conclude by establishing some limits to what I have argued. I have argued for the
conclusion that our agential phenomenology has libertarian satisfaction conditions. That
does not entail that libertarianism is true. There is a further argument that needs to be
given in order to establish that further thesis. This is an argument from the presumptive ver-
idicality of experience - that we should assume that things are the way they appear unless
we have good reasons to think otherwise. I don't think the argument from default veridical-
ity is sound. Probably the most obvious challenge is to say that we in fact are in possession
of good reasons to doubt libertarianism (these being arguments for free will scepticism or
for compatibilism), but Deery (2015) has recently presented a novel way of responding to
the argument from presumptive veridicality that is more subtle.
Extending work in the philosophy of perception by Chalmers (2010), his proposal is
that there could be multiple contents in experience, where one of these contents corre-
sponds to the physical properties that are instantiated during those kinds of experiences.
When we have an experience of colour-properties, we experience the property as simple
and intrinsic, and spread out over the surface of an object. However, we know that
properties like this are not actually instantiated. Yet it would be wrong to say that
an experience of some colour is not veridical, unless our standards for veridicality
are implausibly high. So we should posit the existence of another perceptual content
which tracks the appropriate natural kind that gives rise to the perceived property (in
this case, surfaces that reﬂect light of a particular wavelength). If this content is satis-
ﬁed then the experience is veridical, even if there could not be colour-properties as we
experience them.
Deery's suggestion is that the experience of freedom could be like this, in having two
sorts of content. In this case, the ﬁrst content of the experience of libertarianism corresponds
to properties that are not actually instantiated (those necessary for libertarian free will), and
the second content is the satisfaction condition is "that there is instantiated whatever rel-
evant property (or set of properties) is ordinarily instantiated when one experiences
being free to do otherwise." (Deery 2015, 326) That would allow that our agential phenom-
enology is genuinely libertarian in its content, without the fact that it has that content obli-
ging us to endorse libertarianism.
All this is just to show that I don't think that the argument in this paper is an argument
for libertarianism, since there are many good ways to block the inference from the experi-
ence. What I have given is just an argument for the view that we experience the world as if
libertarianism were true. If the compatibilist wishes to deny this fact, then they must provide
a more compelling argument than can be found in the present literature.
Making sense of the libertarian's semantic claim about agential phenomenology
29

Acknowledgements
Thanks are due for the helpful feedback from an audience at a workshop on 'Sense of Agency and
Moral Responsibility' as well that of colleagues and students who saw me showcase an early iteration
of this argument at the Institut supérieur de philosophie. I gratefully acknowledge the funding of the
ARC project "Causality and Free Will," as well as the support of the INSOSCI research group for
"A Methodological Study on Economic Policies and the Neurosciences of Agency."
Disclosure statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the authors.
Funding
This work was supported by Université Catholique de Louvain
Notes
1.
The term "agential phenomenology" is sometimes used in order to demarcate a putatively dis-
tinct kind of conscious experience which accompanies action and is not reducible to perceptual
phenomenology (e.g. Mylopoulos 2015). This is sometimes also called "sense of agency." I do
not intend to commit myself on this question. I just mean to indicate the general family of
experiences that are associated with mental events preceding and accompanying action and
which are discussed in the free will literature: deciding, choosing, deliberating, and so on. Fur-
thermore, it seems less likely that agentive experiences understood in that former sense are par-
ticularly relevant to the argument I give here, given that those experiences are contiguous with
action that is already occurring or which has already occurred (Haggard 2017). These may be
relevant to a phenomenological defence of agent-causation, but I am not defending the view that
agentive experiences have an agent-causal content.
2.
I do not mean to rule out a conjunction between judgments and experiences, such that perceptual
experiences cannot be a distinct species of judgment or belief. I just mean to underline the epis-
temic difference between judgments that are self-evidencing and judgments that are not.
3.
Some modest pragmatists deny that inferentialism about perception is mandatory (e.g. Orlandi
2014; Tillas et al. 2017). However, even these authors argue for some kind of process which
looks like the inﬂuence of prior knowledge or learning on perception, like "bias" (in Orlandi)
or "a matching process" (in Tillas et al.). It is just that they deny inferentialism of a more
full-blooded sort. So it seems to me that this disagreement hinges on an unnecessarily strong
idea of "inference."
4.
Thanks to an anonymous reviewer for bringing my attention to this point.
5.
See, e.g. Gallese (2007); Brogaard (2011); Madary (2011).
6.
Please continue to keep in mind that I am not arguing for the validity of this entire argument, but
just for the plausibility of (2). I say more about this in the conclusion.
7.
I think, however, that a good case can be made that we do experience affordances. But I will not
argue that here. Some good recent treatments of this issue can be found in Nanay (2011) and Siegel
(2014). The former author denies that he is discussing affordances, but one will see that his "action-
properties" nonetheless appear to be modally signiﬁcant in the way that interests me here.
8.
For the rest of the paper I will speak loosely in the sense that I don't clearly distinguish these, but
everything I say about the semantics of affordances is straightforwardly applicable in both cases.
9.
Of course, there is always the possibility that we are wrong about the existence of faster-than-
light travel. But that would not mean that we can perceive metaphysical possibilities, but just
that we were wrong about what those possibilities are.
10.
It was thanks to a brief yet very helpful exchange with Richard Holton that I was able to see this
Kratzerian way of putting the concern.
Notes on contributor
Andrew Sims is a postdoctoral fellow in the Institut supérieur de philosophie at Université catholique
de Louvain. Here he works on the project "Causality and Free Will," run jointly by the ISP and the
30
Andrew Sims

Institute of Neuroscience. Before that he earned his doctorate at Deakin University with a dissertation
on motivated reasoning in anosognosia, after having spent two years as a visiting fellow in the Depart-
ment of Clinical, Educational and Health Psychology at University College London.
References
Briscoe, R., and R. Grush. 2017. "Action-based Theories of Perception." In The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy Spring 2017 Edition, edited by E. N. Zalta. https://plato.stanford.
edu/archives/spr2017/entries/action-perception/
Brogaard, B. 2011. "Conscious Vision for Action Versus Unconscious Vision for Action?" Cognitive
Science 35 (6): 1076-1104.
Campbell, C. A. 1957. On Selfhood and Godhood. London: Allen & Unwin.
Chalmers, D. 2010. The Character of Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chemero, A. 2003. "An Outline of a Theory of Affordances." Ecological Psychology 15 (2): 181-
195.
Cisek, P., and J. F. Kalaska. 2010. "Neural Mechanisms for Interacting with a World Full of Action
Choices." Annual Review of Neuroscience 33: 269-298.
Collins, A. 1717. A Philosophical Inquiry Concerning Human Liberty. London: Golden Lion.
Deery, O. 2015. "The Fall from Eden: Why Libertarianism isn't Justiﬁed by Experience."
Australasian Journal of Philosophy 93 (2): 319-334.
Fodor, J. 1975. The Language of Thought. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Gallese, V. 2007. "The 'Conscious' Dorsal Stream: Embodied Simulation and its Role in Space and
Action Conscious Awareness." Psyche 13: 1-20.
Gibson, J. J. 1979. The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin.
Goodale, M. A., and A. D. Milner. 1992. "Separate Visual Pathways for Perception and Action."
Trends in Neurosciences 15 (1): 20-25.
Haggard, P. 2017. "Sense of Agency in the Human Brain." Nature Reviews Neuroscience 18 (4): 196-
207.
Holton, R. 2006. "The Act of Choice." Philosophers' Imprint 6 (3): 1-13.
Holton, R. 2009. "Determinism, Self-efﬁcacy, and the Phenomenology of Free Will." Inquiry 52 (4):
412-428.
Humphreys, G. W., and M. J. Riddoch. 2001. "Detection by Action: Neuropsychological Evidence for
Action-Deﬁned Templates in Search." Nature Neuroscience 4 (1): 84-88.
Kratzer, A. 1977. "What 'Must' and 'Can' Must and Can Mean." Linguistics and Philosophy 1 (3):
337-355.
Madary, M. 2011. "The Dorsal Stream and the Visual Horizon." Phenomenology and the Cognitive
Sciences 10: 423-438.
Milner, A. D. 2017. "How do the Two Visual Streams Interact with Each Other?" Experimental Brain
Research 235 (5): 1297-1308.
Mylopoulos, M. 2015. "Agentive Awareness is not Sensory Awareness." Philosophical Studies 172
(3): 761-780.
Nanay, B. 2011. "Do we see Apples as Edible?" Paciﬁc Philosophical Quarterly 92 (3): 305-322.
O'Connor, T. 1995. "Agent Causation." In Agents, Causes, and Events: Essays on Indeterminism and
Free Will, edited by T. O'Connor, 173-200. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
O'Regan, J. K., and A. Noë. 2001. "A Sensorimotor Account of Vision and Visual Consciousness."
Behavioural and Brain Sciences 24 (5): 939-1031.
Orlandi, N. 2014. The Innocent Eye: Why Vision is not a Cognitive Process. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Perry, J. 1979. "The Problem of the Essential Indexical." Noûs 13 (1): 3-21.
Rao, R. P., and D. H. Ballard. 1999. "Predictive Coding in the Visual Cortex: A Functional Interpretation
of Some Extra-classical Receptive-ﬁeld Effects." Nature Neuroscience 2 (1): 79-87.
Reid, T. 1788. Essays on the Active Powers of Man. Edinburgh: Bell and Robinson.
Sahraie, A., P. B. Hibbard, C. T. Trevethan, K. L. Ritchie, and L. Weiskrantz. 2010. "Consciousness of
the First Order in Blindsight." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107 (49): 21217-
21222.
Shea, N. 2013. "Naturalising Representational Content." Philosophy Compass 8 (5): 496-509.
Siegel, S. 2014. "Affordances and the Contents of Perception." In Does Perception Have Content?,
edited by B. Brogaard, 39-76. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Making sense of the libertarian's semantic claim about agential phenomenology
31

Strawson, P. F. 1959. Individuals: An Essay in Descriptive Metaphysics. London: Methuen.
Tillas, A., G. Vosgerau, T. Seuchter, and S. Z. Caiani. 2017. "Can Affordances Explain Behaviour?"
Review of Philosophy and Psychology 8 (2): 295-315.
Van Inwagen, P. 1983. An Essay on Free Will. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Weiskrantz, L. 1996. "Blindsight Revisited." Current Opinion in Neurobiology 6 (2): 215-220.
32
Andrew Sims

