International Journal of Qualitative Studies on Health
and Well-being
ISSN: 1748-2631 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/zqhw20
Toward a phenomenology of taking care
Christophe Coupé & Magali Ollagnier-Beldame
To cite this article: Christophe Coupé & Magali Ollagnier-Beldame (2022) Toward a
phenomenology of taking care, International Journal of Qualitative Studies on Health and Well-
being, 17:1, 2045671, DOI: 10.1080/17482631.2022.2045671
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/17482631.2022.2045671
© 2022 The Author(s). Published by Informa
UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis
Group.
Published online: 15 Mar 2022.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 3446
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 4 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=zqhw20

EMPIRICAL STUDIES
Toward a phenomenology of taking care
Christophe Coupé
a,b and Magali Ollagnier-Beldame
c
aDepartment of Linguistics, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; bLaboratoire DDL, CNRS - University of Lyon, Lyon, France; 
cLaboratoire Icar UMR5191, Cnrs - University of Lyon - ENS Lyon, Lyon, France
ABSTRACT
Context and Purpose: From nurses to dentists and doctors, caregivers undergo significant 
initial and life-long training. This training, however, rarely addresses the subjective side of 
their practice, especially the lived experience of caregiving. Better understanding this experi­
ence can nevertheless help to build fruitful relationships with patients. We focus on what it is 
like to take care of someone else and attempt to outline an encompassing "phenomenology 
of care".
Methods: We investigate the lived experience of caregivers during their first meeting with 
a patient. We rely on micro-phenomenological interviews, which offer fine-grained, first- 
person descriptions of someone's holistic experience in a given situation.
Results: We show how the subjective experience of meeting a new patient can be structured 
with i) categories of micro-experiential acts (gathering information, assessing and performing 
actions), ii) the scopes of these acts, which involve inner and outer perceptions, various 
elaborations, regulations and interventions and iii) a range of experiential modalities.
Conclusion: We highlight the richness of lived experience, and what all caregivers intimately 
share beyond the frame of their respective professions and practices. We discuss our results in 
terms of methodology, finalized and productive activities, pre-reflective aspects, and reflexive 
practice.
ARTICLE HISTORY
Accepted 12 February 2022  
KEYWORDS
Subjective experience; 
caregiver - patient 
relationship; micro- 
phenomenology; 
explicitation interview; 
finalized activity
Introduction
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has shed a crude 
light on the need of strong health care systems and 
what may happen when they are institutionally, and 
more broadly socially, neglected. Some (Legrand, 2020; 
Legros, 2020) have noticed in particular how the cur­
rent situation revitalizes the theory and ethics of care 
promoted by Tronto (2009). This author has indeed 
emphasized the growing importance of paying atten­
tion to and taking care of others, and of establishing 
care and well-being as pillars of our societies.
In Western countries (Europe, Northern America), 
caregivers play a key societal role. This role can, how­
ever, be downplayed in the sense that caregiving is 
actually so present and internalized that it becomes 
invisible. Indeed, in these countries, constant health 
care starts at the first moments of life for most indivi­
duals. This is particularly the case in France where our 
study took place. The COVID 19 pandemic has clearly 
revealed that caregivers were impacted by increased 
workload, overexposure to infectious risk, reorganiza­
tion of care and routine changes. These challenges 
have been amplified by isolation and loss of social sup­
port, and have overall fed a feeling of one's role being 
minimized (Pappa et al., 2020). This has led to psycho- 
traumatic, anxiety, and depression symptoms (Vignaud 
& Prieto, 2020), sleep disorders (Bertrand et al., 2021), 
and burnout (Franc-Guimond & Hogues, 2021).
Nurses, doctors, physiotherapists, psychotherapists 
etc. weave a dense network of skills and practices to 
serve the population on a daily basis, even if those 
assets may not be properly recognized. In such 
a framework, trying to better understand what is at 
play for caregivers' daily practices is a meaningful 
endeavour. What is it like to be a caregiver and to 
take care of someone else? What is the related sub­
jective experience, and how does actual practice differ 
from 
prescriptions? 
What 
may 
constitute 
a phenomenology of care, beyond the specificities of 
different professions?
Relevance of the caregiver—patient relationship 
in care
In many situations of care, the establishment and 
maintenance of the intersubjective relationship 
between the caregiver and the patient are crucial 
issues 
for 
effective 
patient 
support. 
As 
a counterpoint to the biomedical model that was 
dominant until the 1970s, the biopsychosocial model 
CONTACT Christophe Coupé 
ccoupe@hku.hk 
Department of Linguistics, The University of Hong Kong, 9/F, Run Run Shaw Tower, Centennial 
Campus, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong SAR, China 
This article has been republished with minor changes. These changes do not impact the academic content of the article.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF QUALITATIVE STUDIES ON HEALTH AND WELL-BEING
2022, VOL. 17, 2045671
https://doi.org/10.1080/17482631.2022.2045671
© 2022 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group. 
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

developed in 1977 by Engel (Siksou 2008) emphasized
for instance, that: i) the doctor-patient relationship 
influences the medical outcome, if only by influencing 
the adherence to treatment, ii) the doctor's effective­
ness is linked to the fact that her/his personality is an 
instrument of therapeutic change, and iii) the 
patient's subjective experience deserves attention as 
much as the disease (ibid.). Engel thus connected 
biological, psychological, and social factors into 
a complex causal system. In this way, he contributed 
to countering the dehumanization of medicine and 
the infantilization of patients. This perspective has 
recently been reinforced, for instance, with the devel­
opment of therapeutic education for patients (Assal, 
Golay & Visser, 1995; Vargas-Schaffer & Cogan, 2014) 
and the growing role of "expert patients" engaged in 
therapeutic education (Cuvelier, 2018).
Professions in healthcare differ in the precise place 
occupied by the caregiver-patient relationship. While 
a trauma surgeon in emergency situations may not 
have much chance to interact significantly with those 
s/he treats, nurses working at the bedside of patients 
provide far more than biomedical interventions and 
assessments of their health status. Further, while the 
intersubjective relationship may sometimes be seen 
as supportive yet not the most central element of 
care, it is a prerequisite in psychotherapeutic 
approaches: the so-called "therapeutic alliance" 
(Macewan, 2008; Sexton et al., 2005) or "therapeutic 
relationship" (Ardito & Rabellino, 2011), has been 
highlighted in a number of studies, with focus for 
instance, on the "affective attunement" (Stern, 1983, 
2004). It has been debated whether the therapeutic 
outcome depends on a positive therapeutic alliance 
early in treatment (Barber et al., 2000).
The modality and temporal unfolding of the rela­
tionship also differ across professions: in some 
domains like nursing, medicine or physiotherapy, 
interactions are in particular mediated by touch, 
a form of connection which intimacy needs to be 
carefully addressed (Kelly et al., 2018). In the field of 
oncology, the moment when the patient is told about 
her/his illness has been carefully considered (Beach 
et al., 2005; Couitchéré et al., 2019). Indeed, how the 
oncologist handles the announcement can have last­
ing consequences on the patient's attitude towards 
her/his affliction. More generally, how first meetings 
contribute to the therapeutic alliance and the success 
of the treatment has been emphasized (McAllister 
et al., 2004).
Beyond the previous differences across professions 
in healthcare, one can also look for similarities, i.e., 
what may be considered at the core of healthcare. 
One can mention here the metasynthesis of phenom­
enographic articles on understandings of work among 
healthcare professionals conducted by Roïng, Röing 
et al. (2018). These authors highlight a hierarchy of 
ways of understanding which, from a limited to 
a more comprehensive view on patients and on 
their needs, unfolds as:
●Meeting the challenges of being a healthcare 
provider;
●Providing biomedical care to patients;
●Caring for patients as vulnerable individuals;
●Promoting patient independence and responsi­
bility for own care;
●Ensuring holistic safe and effective healthcare 
services.
Another point most healthcare professions, if not 
all, have in common is the asymmetry of role and 
situation between the caregiver and the patient. This 
is true in particular during the first meeting, and 
despite increasing consideration paid to the latter by 
the former. Both actors are ascribed to specific roles, 
which can shape their behaviour: while the caregiver 
is often considered as the depositary of medical 
knowledge and therefore occupies the higher 
grounds, the patient is usually both devoid of this 
knowledge and weakened by what led her/him to 
meet the practitioner. However, both the caregiver 
and the patient are more than what social rules and 
the situation constraint them to be. They retain who 
they are as persons, which contrary to what precedes 
defines a more symmetrical interaction. This may not, 
nevertheless, easily surface during the interaction, 
since medical training heavily insists on the role the 
caregiver must adopt, and how s/he must leave aside 
personal emotions in front of the patient.
Across a number of healthcare professions, being 
able to assess patients' personality and role may 
prove precious for the caregiver during a first meet­
ing. Even outside of psychotherapy, where this is 
a central requirement, and unless biomedical aspects 
occupy the whole space like in surgery, a proper 
assessment may help to better interact with new 
patients, and to craft more genuine and effective 
therapeutic relationships. However, this is not an 
easy task, first because meeting new patients is repe­
titive and usual. Although the very first meetings with 
patients may be noticeable moments for a new prac­
titioner, habits soon step in and decrease one's atten­
tion to the process. Second, while they occur 
repetitively, first meetings engage at the personal 
level and caregivers may avoid behaviours creating 
discomfort or awkwardness. Third, caregivers, to the 
exception of psychotherapists, are often trained 
neither to fully pay attention to the features of this 
crucial moment on the spot, nor to look back at it 
reflectively and reflexively.1 It therefore often consti­
tutes a blind spot. One may thus wonder whether the 
ethical imperative "never the first time on a patient"— 
increasingly influential among professionals, and 
2
C. COUPÉ AND M. OLLAGNIER-BELDAME

encouraging the use of dummies and simulated envir­
onments (Cuvelier, 2018)—should be replaced by the 
alternative principle: "always the first time with 
a patient" (Lechopier, 2020). If so, what particular skills 
do caregivers need to mobilize to "succeed" in their 
first meetings?
Experience in care
The majority of caregivers receive both theoretical 
and practical initial instruction (internships, simu­
lations, etc.), and many of them undergo further 
training throughout their careers. More often than 
not, little room is offered to lived experience 
in situations of care, whether it is the patient's 
experience 
or 
the 
caregiver's. 
Anthropologist 
Byron Good looked at how caregivers accommo­
date (or not) the patient's experience. His work on 
the construction of health professionals shows 
how medical students at the university develop 
their listening style—especially regarding patients' 
voices and illness narratives—and their attitudes 
over the years of their curriculum (Good, 1994). 
For instance, Good studied the linguistic qualities 
of illness narratives. He showed that the context of 
the telling may influence the way the story is 
structured. This paves the way for an analysis of 
the complex relation between the patient's experi­
ence and her/his narrative representations of ill­
ness. More broadly, accounting for the lived 
experience2—both the patient's and the care­
giver's—and studying it in-depth offer additional 
perspectives to those of studies that rely only on 
observable data and/or non-experiential verbal 
reports. For instance, in a study about the lived 
experience of first meetings between caregivers 
and patients, Ollagnier-Beldame and Cazemajou 
(2019) highlighted a type of judgement that 
appears to be central in the intersubjective skills 
of healthcare workers, yet has hardly been inves­
tigated: intellectual judgements (Burloud, 1927), 
also called embodied judgements by the authors. 
They are part of a tacit category of judgment, 
linked to intuitive thinking and a specific mode 
of awareness (Messer, 1906) or affective state. 
Usually expressed by "I feel" (e.g., "I feel something 
strange, I feel that something is happening to him, 
which is a bit strange"), they do not convey only 
a sensory feeling but are directly related to the 
therapists' pre-reflective3 inner organization and 
accumulated skills.
The previous results suggest how the activity of 
meeting someone and the corresponding subjective 
experience may take shape and unfold over time. 
They also promote healthcare workers' reflexive prac­
tice. This reflexive dimension is at the heart of the 
analysis of practices (Henry, 2019) and can be an 
essential component of an ethics of care. In this way, 
the access to lived experience, its precise description 
and its reflexive analysis are a source of learning 
which has the potential to transform caregivers' repre­
sentations and attitudes towards future patients as 
potential partners for better care. The section below 
introduces an epistemology that allows such a study 
of subjective experience.
First-person perspective and epistemology
Studying lived experience "from within" requires 
a 
specific 
epistemology. 
Phenomenological 
approaches make a difference between perspec­
tives in first, second and third person by separat­
ing the perspective of the subject who lives the 
experience from the perspective of another sub­
ject, such as the researcher (Depraz et al., 2003). 
A first-person epistemology considers subjectivity 
as it is experienced by the subject herself/himself 
(Depraz, 
2014; 
Shear 
& 
Varela, 
1999), 
and 
embraces both the perspectives in first (the "I" 
speaking is direct, immediate) and second person 
(the "I" speaking is mediated by another person, 
e.g., an interviewer). The point is to enable access 
to the experience as it is lived by the subject, i.e., 
from her/his own unique perspective.
The first-person epistemology is opposed to the 
third-person epistemology in which subjectivity 
and lived experience are generally viewed as epi­
phenomena or beyond the reach of science 
(Vermersch, 2000a), and observable behaviours 
are examined according to predefined categories. 
This relates to a deep-seated lack of confidence in 
the validity of the data drawn from introspection 
(Nisbett & Wilson, 1977), although such data have 
been 
given 
renewed 
legitimacy 
(Hurlburt 
& 
Heavey, 2006; Petitmengin et al., 2013). It is impor­
tant to bear in mind that the first-person episte­
mology is not an epistemology of immediacy since 
experience, while it may be lived and familiar, has 
a pre-reflective dimension. Knowing it in detail 
presupposes an objectification of one's subjectiv­
ity—no easy task despite the apparent transpar­
ency of intimacy and familiarity. Thus, the first 
and second-person perspectives should not be 
confused with immediate donation, i.e., for the 
subject, a sudden, clear and distinct illumination 
(Vermersch, 2000b).
'Indeed, being epistemically related to facts about 
oneself ("I") is not a sufficient condition for first- 
person perspective taking: You can also have an 
objective, third-person view on your headache. 
[. . .] What is needed is a difference not in terms 
of the epistemic object but, rather, in terms of 
epistemic access - even if it may turn out to be 
necessary to refer to specific epistemic objects in 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF QUALITATIVE STUDIES ON HEALTH AND WELL-BEING
3

order to clarify what the specific kind of access is.
The decisive point seems to be that there are 
certain 
features of 
oneself 
that do 
require 
a specific kind of epistemic access' (Pauen, 2012, 
pp. 37-38). 
This crucial question of the epistemic access to experi­
ence has led to the development of many experiential 
data collection methods (Gendlin, 1997; Giorgi, 2009; 
Hurlburt 
& 
Heavey, 
2006; 
Petitmengin, 
2001; 
Vermersch, 1994). They offer different possibilities of 
"survey" and experiential description, depending on 
the type of experience and research goals. To us, the 
method both most complete and most suitable for 
describing action is the micro-phenomenological 
interview, also called explicitation interview, to 
which the first section in "Materials and methods" is 
dedicated. 
Many 
researches 
are 
based 
on 
it 
(Dieumegard et al., 2021; Ollagnier-Beldame & 
Cazemajou, 2019; Petitmengin, 2001; Petitmengin, 
2006; Przyrembel & Singer, 2018), some of which 
study situations of care (Denis, 2016; Ollagnier- 
Beldame & Cazemajou, 2019).
Materials and methods
The micro-phenomenological interview as a 
data-collecting tool
To collect our data, we relied on the micro- 
phenomenological interview, also called explicitation 
interview. This technique was initially developed in 
the 1990s and later elaborated, especially in terms of 
analysis, 
by 
Pierre 
Vermersch 
(1994, 
2012), 
Petitmengin (2006, 2019) and members of the GREX 
(Research Group in Explicitation). In contrast with 
other types of interviews, which focus on social repre­
sentations (Moscovici, 2000), it is concerned with lived 
experience. Theoretically, it rests on several comple­
mentary contributions in philosophy, psychology, and 
phenomenology:
●Edmund Husserl (1933)'s phenomenology, which 
plays a central role with notions such as reten­
tions (echoes of the immediate past in the pre­
sent time) and protentions (the potential "future 
of the present" as it exists in the present time). 
They highlight how situatedness in time is 
a defining feature of one's present-time subjec­
tive experience, and this outlines the importance 
of studying peculiar and specific moments 
(Vermersch, 2012), unless one is interested in 
classes of experiences and generalizations.  
●Gusdorf (1951)'s theory of affective memory, 
which posits that lived experience is constantly 
and passively memorized;
●Piaget (1974)'s theory of consciousness, which 
emphasizes that part of one's consciousness is 
implicit, a "consciousness in action" which may, 
however, be brought to conscious awareness 
and verbalized;
●Gendlin's philosophy of the implicit (Gendlin, 
1978) and focusing interview (Gendlin, 1997), 
which show how experiencing a situation is 
always embodied. This vague felt experience is 
known as "bodily felt sense" and contains mean­
ing regarding the situation as a whole.
Following Husserl and the other aforementioned 
authors, Vermersch (2008) describes three modes of 
consciousness: i) a phenomenological unconscious (cf. 
Husserl), during which lived experience is passively 
memorized (cf. Gusdorf), before any intentional act; 
ii) a mode of reflective consciousness, which corre­
sponds to what the subject is aware of; iii) in between, 
a pre-reflective mode of direct consciousness, or con­
sciousness in action, which at a given moment 
includes all of one's perceptions, sensations and feel­
ings (cf. Gendlin) but is not readily accessible, though 
its content can eventually reach reflective conscious­
ness through a process of reflection (cf. Piaget).
The micro-phenomenological interview can be 
described as a technique of guided retrospective 
introspection, which means that the interviewer (com­
monly named B), with carefully chosen questions, 
assists and guides the interviewee (named A) as s/he 
recalls and revisits a past experience. Under the inter­
viewer's guidance, the interviewee is led to suspend 
her/his 
judgement—a 
process 
known 
as 
the 
Husserlian epoché (Depraz et al., 2003). More specifi­
cally, according to Depraz, Varela and Vermersch:
'one accomplishes the epoché in three principal 
phases: 
A0: Suspending your "realist" prejudice that what 
appears to you is truly the state of the world; this is 
the only way you can change the way you pay atten­
tion to your own lived experience; in other words, 
you must break with the "natural attitude." 
A1: Redirecting your attention from the "exterior" to 
the "interior." 
A2: Letting-go or accepting your experience.' 
(Depraz et al., 2003, p. 25) 
The epoché is thus what allows the interviewee to 
access her/his past lived experience. Of paramount 
importance is the open and non-inductive nature of 
the questions, which results in a guidance that is 
attentional rather than orienting the content of the 
answers. Concretely, when exploring a perceptual epi­
sode, the initial question "what do you perceive?" may 
for instance, be more adapted than the question
4
C. COUPÉ AND M. OLLAGNIER-BELDAME

"what do you see?", as it does not imply the percep­
tual modality that was then dominant for the inter­
viewee. More generally, perlocutionary effects of the 
interventions are controlled as much as possible to 
prevent the possible induction of distorted or false 
memories (Schacter, 2001). The interviewer's interven­
tions also aim to induce and maintain the intervie­
wee's activity of introspection, with a process of 
letting go favouring the surfacing of the past experi­
ence. The slightly modified state of consciousness 
which favours a presence to oneself and an intimate 
contact with the past situation is called the "embo­
died posture of speech". It is not spontaneous and can 
also be endangered, for instance, when recapitula­
tions deviate from the interviewee's precise words 
and descriptions. Careful listening is thus essential, 
as well as regular assessments of complementary ver­
bal and non-verbal cues—unfocused eyes, the slow­
ing down of speech, the use of the personal pronoun 
"I" rather than "we" etc.
Overall, the set of interventions is limited by several 
factors: first, the objectives of the interview, i.e., the nature 
of the information one wishes to collect; second, what is 
theoretically known of experience, and which corre­
sponds to rather high-level generic processes (e.g., the 
model of action below); and third, what the interviewee 
tells the interviewer. Interventions thus mostly consist in 
recurrent question frames, with a limited set of verbs and 
temporal articulations, e.g., "[and then/just before/just 
after,] what do you feel/perceive/do/hear", "[at that very 
moment/just before/ . . .] how do you know that?", "how 
does it feel?", "what do you do/pay attention to/feel 
[when you + verb of action]?" etc.
The aim of the micro-phenomenological interview 
is to collect detailed descriptions of a singular lived 
experience. These descriptions aim to be holistic in 
the sense that the various components of experience, 
from cognitive operations and physical actions to 
sensations and emotions, are considered and deemed 
of interest. What are sought are specific descriptions 
of what was experienced, and not generalizations 
derived from repeated situations and habits, nor opi­
nions. This explains in particular why "why" questions 
are disregarded, as they tend to induce unwanted 
comments and opinions. Interviewers look for both 
fragmentation, which corresponds to the collection of 
the diachronic succession of microscopic experiential 
events that compose larger-scale experiences, and for 
qualitative expansion, which points at the various 
facets in synchrony of the experiential events. The 
pre-reflective aspects of the experience under study, 
i.e., the part of it that remained below the threshold 
of consciousness, are given special attention since 
they may contain useful information regarding what 
was lived and how it unfolded. This includes in parti­
cular the possible sources of errors made during an 
activity or implicit aspects of expert knowledge.
As it targets first-person descriptions, the micro- 
phenomenological 
interview 
differs 
from 
third- 
person methods, where data is collected from an 
external viewpoint, often considered to be objective. 
In micro-phenomenology, words are endowed with 
considerable trust, as they provide (the only) access 
to subjective experience. While it is not always possi­
ble to assess the extent of the semiotic transformation 
implied by the wording of a "wordless" experience, it 
makes sense to assumes that different choices of 
words point to subtle differences between experi­
ences: the presence of a sense of agency in "I feel 
that she is scared" suggests a different experience 
from the absence of the same sense of agency in 
"This feeling that she is scared, that's what comes 
to me".
Process of data collection for the study
A total of 13 caregivers from various care professions 
were interviewed: two speech therapists (both 
female), two family medicine practitioners (one 
female, one male), one dentist (male), one phy­
siotherapist (female), three psychotherapists (two 
females, one male), four nurses (with various speciali­
zations, three females, one male). All participants were 
native French speakers. The interviews took place in 
the interviewee's workplace or in a meeting room 
located in one of the authors' research institutions. 
No strict control was enforced for variables such as 
the interviewee's gender or the match or mismatch 
between the interviewer and interviewee's genders.
This study follows the Helsinki Declaration (World 
Medical Association, 2013). The primary objective of 
our research was to generate new knowledge on care, 
without prevailing over the health, well-being, and 
rights of our participants. Along these lines, all the 
interviewees were experienced and practising health 
professionals.
With each of our interviewee, we took first ample 
time to i) introduce the aims, methods and institu­
tional framework of our research, including data col­
lection for the sole purpose of research and data 
anonymization, ii) inform the interviewee that s/he 
could stop the interview at any time for whatever 
reason, iii) explain the interviewee that s/he was 
entirely free to choose the first meeting s/he was 
most interested in, and to keep elements of this meet­
ing for her/himself if s/he felt the need to, and iv) 
answer any possible question. We obtained full and 
explicit oral consent to participate in the study before 
starting the audio-recorded interviewing process. No 
information regarding the identity of the patients that 
had been met by the interviewees was ever collected, 
and no name was ever mentioned.
We chose not to ask for a written consent, as we 
feared this more formal approach could increase the
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF QUALITATIVE STUDIES ON HEALTH AND WELL-BEING
5

asymmetry of the relation and lead the interviewee to 
watch her/his words more restrictively. Micro- 
phenomenological interviews indeed require a lot of 
trust, as the interviewee usually discloses intimate 
experience s/he is not used to share. Increased form­
ality could also have led caregivers to act as profes­
sionals even in front of the interviewer.
Each interview lasted between 45 and 90 minutes. 
The total duration of the recordings was 14 hours, 
7 minutes, and 42 seconds. 10 or the 13 recordings 
were fully transcribed. The 10 micro-interviews proper 
lasted together 552 minutes and 41 seconds, with 
a mean duration of 55 minutes and 16 seconds and 
a standard deviation of 14 minutes and 57 seconds. 
Their transcriptions, with added information about 
time and numbered interventions assigned to the 
interviewer or the interviewee, contained a total of 
117,142 words, with a mean number of 11,714 words 
per transcription and a standard deviation of 3,286 
words. Transcriptions are available upon request to 
the corresponding author.
Information on the educational and training back­
ground, the number of years of practice and the 
professional context of intervention (private/public 
practice, patients etc.) was also collected to provide 
a number of meta-data for later analysis.
Upon carefully reading the 11 transcriptions, 7 
were considered for further analysis.
Analytical approach to the interviews and 
transcriptions
Our analytical approach to experience is qualitative 
and faces the epistemological and methodological 
challenges of all qualitative approaches. These chal­
lenges relate to the bottom-up construction, organi­
zation 
and 
selection 
of 
relevant 
possible 
interpretations of one's raw material (Saldaña, 2011) 
As described below, our method rests on a time- 
tested iterative approach, in order to extract mean­
ingful descriptive categories of experience.
Following Vermersch's initial take on how to ana­
lyse data collected from micro-phenomenological 
interviews (Vermersch, 2012), Petitmengin (2006) but 
also Valenzuela-Moguillansky and Vásquez-Rosati 
(2019) have refined and clearly specified the analytical 
process for research purpose.
Vermersch has proposed a process of repeated 
semiosis to gradually turn the interviewee's experi­
ence into actionable micro-phenomenological knowl­
edge. This process starts with the experience itself 
and how it is put into words by the interviewee. At 
this stage already, a semiotic transformation occurs, 
since some experiences are harder than others to 
express with words. The next stage is the transcription 
of recordings, during which various aspects of speech 
(pitch, intensity, rhythm) are often omitted for the 
sake of simplicity, although they may provide valuable 
information (it is, however, always possible to come 
back to early stages of the process of semiosis in 
search of useful information).
Below are details of our specific treatment of the 
transcriptions, with most steps commonly followed by 
researchers in micro-phenomenology: i) insert A and 
B in front of the uninterrupted interventions of the 
interviewee and the interviewer, respectively, and 
number the interventions one after the other for 
later referencing, i.e., B1, A2, B3, A4 etc.; ii) discard 
aborted sentences, repetitions/duplications, "uh", indi­
cations of pauses or timing and brief interventions of 
agreement to increase readability (once again, all the 
steps of the progressive distillation of the initial mate­
rial are preserved in case coming back to them would 
prove useful at a later stage of the analysis); iii) keep 
A's descriptions of her/his experience and discard all 
other non-experiential pieces of information,, such as 
comments, opinions etc. Some key contextual ele­
ments can, however, be preserved if they shed mean­
ingful light on the report of experience. For instance, 
interventions from B such as recapitulations can be 
deleted, but some key questions can remain if they 
usefully show how A's attentional process is guided. 
Questions without which A's answers would not make 
sense are recoded and appear with parentheses to 
prevent confusion with words actually uttered by A, 
e.g., [B: "how did you feel?" A: "a bit nervous"] becomes 
[A: "(I feel/felt) a bit nervous"]. Everything that is not 
experiential description is presented with a specific 
ink colour to clearly delineate it; iv) to ease under­
standing, move complementary information that 
appears later in the transcription to an earlier state­
ment if it clarifies and/or specifies it (in connection 
with vii. below); v) underline verbs pointing to the 
interviewee's activity—perceptions, sensations, men­
tal activity, speech, actions etc. (e.g., "I tell myself", "I 
see that", "I propose", "I notice", "I ask" etc.)—to high­
light the interviewee's commonly favoured sensorial 
modalities and actions; vi) cut and organize the tex­
tual content in a succession of key moments, with 
corresponding labels, to build a comprehensive bird 
view of the lived experience; vii) further reorganize 
the content in order to fully shift from the chronology 
of the interview (V2) to the chronology of the experi­
ence itself (V1); viii) delete the numbering of the 
interventions for the sake of readability.
The result of the previous steps is called a "time 
unfolding" of the experience and is the basis for 
further analysis. In the specific case of the present 
study, in which A (the caregiver) is describing a first 
meeting with a patient, some actions of this patient, 
as perceived and reported by the caregiver, were kept 
to ease the understanding of the situation and of its 
dynamics. Also, some patients were accompanied, 
especially younger ones, and therefore the caregiver's
6
C. COUPÉ AND M. OLLAGNIER-BELDAME

experience could also include this/these additional 
person(s).
While the early stages of the process of transforma­
tion of the transcriptions are rather straightforward, 
later stages, and especially stages vi and vii, often 
require efforts and are more interpretative. It is some­
times difficult to reconstruct the chronology of the 
experience with confidence as the interviewing pro­
cess, with the fragmenting of the time of the experi­
ence, often disconnects and disseminates temporally 
contiguous micro-experiential events.
Beyond the previous process of extraction of 
actionable information, Vermersch also proposed 
a microscopic model of action (Faingold, 1997; 
Vermersch, 1994). It articulates several successive 
phases during action and is useful both as a support 
to guide the interviewee to describe her/his experi­
ence during the interview and to later organize it 
chronologically in a meaningful way. This model is 
reminiscent of earlier ones, which attempted to 
account for what took place at a cognitive level 
between a stimulus and a response, such as the 
TOTE (Test-Operate-Test-Exit) model (Miller et al., 
1960).
As displayed in Figure 1, the process of action 
starts with 1) collecting information, then goes on 
with 2) identifying relevant information, 3) making 
a decision and 4) carrying out/implementing what 
has been decided. Interviewees usually report 
the second and fourth steps more spontaneously 
but can then be questioned explicitly on the other 
steps.
Once the "time unfolding" of the experience has 
been reconstructed, one has access to a rich and 
condensed description, with the articulation of suc­
cessive micro-experiential phenomena composed of 
perceptions and sensations, actions, decision-making 
etc. Such material was analysed to reach the results 
reported in the next section.
Results
To better characterize the experience of meeting 
a new patient for the first time, we analysed in 
a qualitative way the micro-components of the care­
givers' experience, as extracted from the verbatim of 
our interviews and chronologically reorganized. We 
aimed to devise several complementary dimensions 
and, within each of them, a number of categories to 
reflect the diversity of situations and actions per­
formed. We argue that characterizing the panorama 
of possible micro-experiences is the first step to 
a 
deeper 
understanding—without 
an 
accurate 
description, a phenomenon cannot be properly 
investigated.
From an epistemological point of view, our data 
could be analysed with either a bottom-up approach 
—extracting "emerging" descriptive categories from 
the verbatim—or a top-down one—projecting cate­
gories derived from theory on the verbatim to orga­
nize it. As we thought both perspectives had their 
benefits and limits, we chose to adopt an intermedi­
ate standpoint, taking advantage of well-identified 
concepts, especially from micro-phenomenology, 
while still staying faithful to our data when delineat­
ing a set of categories.
The extracts of the verbatim reported below are 
English translations of the French material. The 
sources of these translations can be found in the 
appendix 'Original verbatim in French'.
Main dimensions of experience
To guide us in the categorization of micro-experiential 
phenomena (MEP), we initially considered the two 
fundamental articulations of micro-phenomenology: 
i) the succession of these MEP through time, i.e., 
their diachrony, and ii) their various dimensions at 
any given moment, i.e., their synchrony.
Figure 1. The model of action with related possible answers and questions in a micro-phenomenological interview.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF QUALITATIVE STUDIES ON HEALTH AND WELL-BEING
7

At the diachronic level, we started from the model 
of action and its four causally related steps: i) gathering 
information, ii) identifying the situation (based on the 
information collected), iii) making a decision (after 
identifying the stakes of the situation) and iv) carrying 
out. We found that the third step was rarely identifiable 
as such in interviews, and was rather inferred from the 
fourth step onwards, as if it were in the "undercurrent" 
of the carrying out of action. We thus decided to drop 
it and consider three categories of acts—in the broad 
sense of the term, i.e., including perceptual acts, cog­
nitive acts, speech acts, motor acts etc.—performed by 
the caregiver. We labelled these categories by adapting 
the terms of the model of action to better suit our 
verbatim, in order to remain close to the verbs most 
often used by the caregivers: i) "Gathering informa­
tion", ii) "Assessing" (rather than identification) and iii) 
"Performing actions" (as a simplification of the concept 
of carrying out a decision, since the process of deci­
sion-making often remained undescribed). We noticed 
in particular that assessments sometimes led to 
actions, but not always.
Considering the various synchronic dimensions of 
micro-experiences led us to further devise several 
scopes for the previous acts. They specifically reflect 
the situation of care, with the caregiver and the 
patient as main actors. They also characterize the 
caregiver's perspective on this situation. For informa­
tion gathering first, regarding the source of informa­
tion, we first found that the caregiver gathers outer 
information, i.e., outside of her/his body, but also 
often inner information, i.e., within her/himself. In 
terms of scope, while one may initially associate
outer information with the other—the patient—and 
inner information with oneself—here, the caregiver—, 
we found that inner information could also be related 
to the other. This highlights a possibly neglected 
source of information in at least some medical prac­
tices. We did not, however, find outer information 
about oneself, although this could have been possi­
ble, e.g., when one looks at her/his facial expressions 
in a mirror, or hears a recording of her/his own voice, 
i.e., elements not accessible "from within".
In a similar fashion, we observed that assessments 
could relate to a variety of scopes: the caregiver her/ 
himself, the patient, but also their relationship or the 
situation, for instance, the perceived mood in the 
environment. Finally, in terms of actions, the caregiver 
could either regulate, i.e., act upon her/himself, "inter­
vene", i.e., act on the patient, or yet do something 
else. Table I summarizes our attempt and illustrates 
each possible situation with some verbatim. Figure 2 
further explicitly connects categories and scopes of 
acts to the activity of taking care in the first moments 
of a meeting with a new patient.
In addition to the previous categories and scopes 
of acts, we concluded to the need to specify the main 
experiential modality of either the gathering of infor­
mation, the assessments or the actions of the care­
giver. These modalities partly overlap with our five 
senses, but some of the latter are absent, while addi­
tional conditions were required. We thus considered:
●the visual, auditory, and tactile modalities from 
the five senses—there were no instances of 
olfaction or taste;
●the extra-sensory modality, which covers percep­
tual experiences which do not relate to any sin­
gle perceptual modality but which are perceived 
other than with the organs of perception;
●feelings, i.e., perceptions which do not overlap 
with the five senses;
●inner speech, i.e., linguistic productions directed 
towards oneself;
●(outer) speech, directed towards others;
●motor activity;
●embodied judgements. This category refers to 
intellectual feelings, i.e., unanalysed impressions 
becoming ideas, judgements, and reasoning 
(Burloud, 1927). These conclusive, expert, and 
intuitive judgements usually come after a series 
of taking information and judgements, in the 
Table I. Categories and scopes of acts performed by the caregiver appearing in the verbatim of the interviews, with illustrations.
Category of acts
Scope of acts
Example of verbatim (translated to English)
Gathering 
information
Outer information on 
the other
I see someone (a bit scared) who hastily puts back a magazine a comic book or a journal in the magazine 
rack on the coffee table who grabs her coat
Inner information on 
oneself
There is like some heat in a corner of my head
Inner information on 
the other
There is a resonance/it's in my body/I feel there's an emptiness where the other is
Assessing
Oneself
I tell myself that I'm not the person that people think I am at this moment
The other
I find that the father and the son are a lot alike (laughs)
The relation
I tell myself "ah" there's going to be something dynamic I feel that the appointment is going to be dynamic 
(. . .) It's something experienced by the whole body
The situation
I tell myself that once again this is going to be a difficult story to hear
Performing 
actions
Regulating (on 
oneself)
I try to keep this reassuring attitude towards him while telling myself that it's also like this that what comes 
afterwards will be of good quality
Intervening (on the 
other)
By looking, I collect what he himself brings at that moment
Others
I also start to squirm
8
C. COUPÉ AND M. OLLAGNIER-BELDAME

form of an insight. As Burloud writes, "the sub­
ject knows what to do but he has no representa­
tion of it".
For instance, data collected outside of the body could 
be of a visual or auditory nature, internal information 
could consist in sensations, actions could consist in 
physical actions but also speech towards the patient 
or inner speech towards oneself. Table II provides 
illustrations for the various experiential modalities.
Objects of attention and acts
The previous categories and scopes of acts are quite 
"high-level" and do not exhaust the content of our 
verbatim. More precise instances of acts performed by 
the caregiver but also objects of attention can be 
provided to get a better perspective of what the 
caregiver may experience. We delved into these ele­
ments as a mean to flesh out the previous main 
dimensions of experience. By doing so, various pieces 
of information, assessments, regulations, and inter­
ventions can be highlighted, which are meaningful 
to understand both the strategies implemented by 
the caregiver and her/his more spontaneous reactions 
in front of the patient.4 We paid close attention to the 
words used by interviewees to extract these finer- 
grained categories, hence their number.
Table III reports the categories of object of attention 
we identified and their members. They focus mostly on 
the patient and her/his observable features, but also 
cover unobservable body and mental states which are 
inferred to be hers/his. This is understandable given the 
broad objectives of caregivers during a first meeting. 
Besides, the latter also pay attention to their inner 
Figure 2. Organization of the acts performed by the caregiver during her/his first meeting with the patient in terms of categories 
and scopes of acts.
Table II. Experiential modalities for the caregiver with exam­
ples of verbatim.
Experiential 
modality
Example of verbatim (translated to English)
Visual
His gaze was alert his eyes bright and shining his 
gaze is not lifeless
Auditory
I perceived at that moment that he had a severe 
articulatory disorder
Tactile
I actually pay attention (. . .) to the handshake
Extra-sensory
He doesn't exist (. . .) If I tried to touch him there 
would be no texture it would fall apart or it would 
be a ghost and I would pass through it it's 
a feeling that the other person has no substance
Feelings
I feel that the arms relax and then I even feel that the 
shoulders relax there is an opening near the 
clavicles
Inner speech
I tell myself "ah" there's going to be something 
dynamic
(Outer) Speech
I say ok I am ready to work with you about the rape
Motor activity
I am the one who opened the door
Embodied 
judgement
There is this slightly global idea of "ah" both of them 
are making a good impression
Table III. Objects of attention and their categories.
Category of objects of 
attention
Objects of attention
Identity marker
First name and last name
(Observable) physical 
aspect and expressions
General appearance, hair, clothing & 
accessories, social class, gaze/eyes, 
smile, height, face
(Observable) features of 
voice and language
Coherence, elocution, loquacity, 
modulation, language register, 
expressions, voice (rate, pitch . . .)
"Dynamism" of the 
person
Attitude, dynamism, listening skills, 
intentional gestures, non-intentional 
gestures, handshake, way of walking, 
body posture, embodiment, 
breathing, silence, physical tension
(Unobservable) body or 
mental state
Abilities, internal states (emotions, 
feelings, mental readiness), psychic 
state (related to a pathology), internal 
images, thoughts, knowledge
Motive for consultation
Personal history, consultation request, 
personal issues/problems
Setting
Atmosphere (ambiance, energy), 
environment, situation, "framework"
Relation to the other
Welcome/reception, adjustment to the 
other, relational attitude, caregiver's 
own body feelings, patient's readiness 
for treatment, caregiver's personal 
history, caregiver's therapeutic 
posture, relational situation (in part. 
Therapeutic alliance)
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF QUALITATIVE STUDIES ON HEALTH AND WELL-BEING
9

reactions to the patient, to elements which define and 
influence them such as their personal history, and to the 
relation they are building in a global and unfolding 
situation. These objects of attention offer an inner, inti­
mate perspective on actual external phenomena; while 
the latter could be captured with an objective approach, 
only a subjective approach can reveal the former.
Figure 3 summarizes and explicitly connects the 
different dimensions of micro-experiential phenom­
ena, namely acts, experiential modalities and objects 
of attention.
In terms of precise instances of acts, Figure 4 reports 
a list for each scope under the categories of acts. These 
lists outline the diversity of acts rather than they offer an 
organization based on principles such as completeness, 
homogeneity of levels of description or mutual exclu­
sivity. For instance, for "gathering outer information on 
the other", one finds "listening", "seeing" and "feeling" 
but also the more encompassing "paying attention to". 
Among other interesting points, we can highlight that 
the act of "projecting something from someone to 
someone" occurs in various configurations under 
"Assessing": from the other to oneself, from oneself to 
oneself (considering different states or ages), from the 
other to the other, and from oneself to the other. 
Additionally, the different acts under "Regulating", 
which would be invisible to an external observer, reflect 
the multiplicity of strategies or reactions available to the 
caregiver. One can distinguish in particular several acts 
of kindness or benevolence towards oneself ("allowing 
oneself to have made a mistake", "protecting oneself", 
"reassuring oneself") and towards the other ("remaining 
open/curious", "inner welcoming").
Discussion
Benefits of the micro-phenomenological interview
We argue that our approach offers some benefits 
compared to other common approaches, for instance, 
the 
phenomenographic 
one. 
Phenomenography 
focuses on lived experience just like we did with the 
micro-phenomenological interview, but how data on 
this experience are collected differs. The phenomeno­
graphic method relies essentially on the posture of 
the interviewer—more than on her/his technique. S/ 
he must show great empathy towards the intervie­
wee, introduces the topic of the interview with an 
open question, and then lets the interviewee speak, 
guiding her/him if necessary. This guidance is based 
essentially on the researcher's interest in the partici­
pant's experience and openness to the answers given.
In comparison, the micro-phenomenological inter­
view relies on more precise technical choices when 
guiding the interviewee's attention. Its key advantage 
is that it gives access to the pre-reflective experience, 
something the interviewee has difficulty exploring on 
her/his own but can access under the careful gui­
dance of a trained interviewer. In particular, it is pos­
sible to access pre-reflective micro-actions such as 
information gathering and decision-making, which 
underlie identification and carrying-out, as we have 
presented in the model of action (cf., Figure 3). These 
micro-actions are very valuable to understand one's 
activity because they correspond to the criteria on 
which s/he relies on to do what s/he does.
Focusing on the invisible
Our contribution is an experiential study of the activ­
ity of taking care, in the first moments of a first care­
giver-patient meeting. We centred our attention on 
the caregiver's point of view, especially to highlight 
the importance of what she/he projects onto the 
patient within the clinical relationship.
It has been shown that countertransference—a 
constitutive process of the clinical relationship during 
which arise the caregiver's projections, ideology, feel­
ings, past experience, etc.—is as decisive as transfer 
from the patient in the psychotherapeutic relationship 
Figure 3. Description of the three main dimensions of micro-phenomenological phenomena: acts, objects of attention and 
experiential modalities.
10
C. COUPÉ AND M. OLLAGNIER-BELDAME

(Devereux, 1973). The projections that caregivers 
develop about their patients do not, however, only 
concern situations of psychotherapy. Indeed, our ana­
lyses show that these processes occur for all the 
caregivers we have interviewed. As such, they high­
light a unifying aspect of care across different 
professions.
Beyond the previous point, in an attempt to lift the 
veil on the invisible side of caregivers' practice, we 
studied their experience of situations of first meeting 
with patients so as to propose a dialectic between 
first-person cognitive science and practice, beyond 
the "cognitivist empire" (De Sousa Santos, 2018). Our 
analyses reveal inner practices among caregivers that 
play an important role, such as "gathering inner infor­
mation", either about oneself or the other, and per­
forming different forms of regulation.
Caregiving as a finalized activity
Like most professionals, caregivers work in the con­
text of a finalized activity (Daniellou & Rabardel, 2005). 
A "finalized activity" is an "activity focused on the 
accomplishment of practical objectives" (Garfinkel, 
1967) which differs from an "open-ended activity", 
for which the expected results are indefinite or only 
loosely specified. For caregivers, among the main 
goals are the needs to establish a diagnosis and to 
build a therapeutic alliance (Rogers, 1957; Roth & 
Fonagy, 2006). We questioned them and they accord­
ingly described actions that are relevant to making 
a diagnosis—for example, 'I tell myself at that moment, 
let's go digging, maybe he's not an autistic kid, maybe 
he's high potential'5 (a speech therapist) or "there's 
really this hat as a therapist that's there that's really 
there and that, hmm (taking a deep breath), knows" (a 
psychotherapist). They also designated actions parti­
cipating in the construction of a therapeutic alliance 
—"and then I ask him to tell me who lives with them in 
the house. Once he has mentioned all the people in the 
family, I ask him if there are goldfish, turtles, hamsters 
other living people" (a nurse).
We found in our data much verbatim related to the 
category "Gathering information", which confirms that 
collecting information is at the core of caregivers' 
activity. For instance, a speech therapist told us 
"I say to myself, there's going to be something dynamic, 
I hear that and I feel that the interview is going to be 
dynamic, at the same time as I say it to myself, I feel 
that it's being experienced by my whole body".
The category "Assessing" that emerged from the 
inspection of our verbatim also relates to the notion 
of finalized activity. It articulates it, at least partly, with 
the model of action that occupies a central place in 
micro-phenomenology. More precisely, we have pre­
ferred "assessing" to the more general "identification", 
since it corresponds more faithfully to the intention of 
making a diagnosis expressed by the caregivers them­
selves. For instance, a psychologist declared "one sees 
there is suffering, discomfort . . . and it moves really fast 
her body and gestures change quickly as she evokes it", 
while a psychotherapist, using a diagnostic term, 
related that "(. . .) meticulous, scrupulous, he has 
a very contrived way of doing things, I see that it's 
a guy who has obsessive compulsive disorders". These 
descriptions illustrate how caregivers pre-reflectively 
take information in order to diagnose. The experien­
tial and pre-reflective dimensions of the assessment of 
the situation thus seem quite fundamental constitu­
ents of the finalized activity of diagnosis. In particular, 
in our interviews, we identified some intellectual feel­
ings, which turned out to be embodied expert assess­
ments, which relate to and crystallize the caregiver's 
whole expertise and the multitude of situations s/he 
has 
previously 
experienced 
professionally. 
For 
instance, during a session, while one of our caregivers 
Figure 4. Instances of acts for the categories and scopes of acts.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF QUALITATIVE STUDIES ON HEALTH AND WELL-BEING
11

gathers information concerning his patient's attitude,
appearance, and silence, he also does so about his 
own bodily sensations: he notices his altered breath­
ing as well as a tension behind his neck and head. He 
makes several assessments about the "quality of 
silence" and the presence of his patient, and then 
comes to the following conclusive intellectual feeling: 
"I feel something strange, I feel that something is hap­
pening to him which is a bit strange, I am telling myself 
there is something here which is not right" (a psy­
chotherapist). Of course, what he "feels" is not 
a feeling strictly speaking but rather a summative 
experience in the light of Burloud's work.
Caregiving as a productive and constructive 
finalized activity
Any finalized activity is simultaneously "productive" 
and "constructive". It is productive since it is focused 
on the accomplishment of a project, according to the 
characteristics of the situation. It is also constructive 
since it is involved in the development of external 
and internal resources—such as instruments, skills, 
concepts or value systems (Rabardel, 2005). In relation 
to these two facets of finalized activity, experience 
has a dual nature. First, it is a "product" of activity, 
which to us connects well to the concept expressed 
by the German word erlebnis, i.e., the fact of having 
lived something, as well as the set of thoughts, per­
ceptions, and sensations that this experience has 
aroused. Most verbatim illustrates the productive 
facet of the caregiving activity, for instance, when 
a dentist says "I hold my breath, I breathe with my 
upper body, I prepare myself for everything to take 
longer with that person". Secondly, experience can 
be considered as a material in its own right, an object 
worked upon by constructive activity. While produc­
tivity relates to erlebnis, this evokes the concept of 
erfahrung, i.e., the experience one gets from doing 
something, often over a long period. An explicit illus­
tration of how a caregivers' knowledge manifests 
itself experientially is given by the example of 
a doctor who reported "That's where I start to look 
a little at semiology, like 'how does he move?', at 
analysing it. It's more of a global situation, like 
a compilation of patients who had the same mode of 
movement, a sum of clinical cases". It is worth noticing 
that during micro-phenomenological interviews, the 
interviewee describes her/his specific subjective 
experience, lived at a particular moment, which cor­
responds to the erlebnis. But when s/he describes an 
experience that corresponds to personal knowledge, 
this also concerns the erfahrung, as it occurs in the 
erlebnis, e.g., "I immediately think of technical observa­
tions. I make connections with the kids I've had to meet; 
I think of another patient I knew when she was the 
same age and with whom I loved to work" (a speech 
therapist).
Some caregivers (psychotherapists, psychologists, 
etc.) are trained to stay aware during the session of 
all that is happening in the relationship: all that they 
notice with their patient but also all that they feel, 
think, experience in relation to their patient—which 
has been conceptualized under the term counter­
transference 
in 
psychoanalytically-inspired 
psy­
chotherapies. 
Our 
study 
shows 
that 
similar 
projections onto patients do, in fact, occur within all 
caregivers. For instance, a nurse told us "I feel like he 
wants to go and play, I feel like he's not going to tell me 
much more", and a speech therapist "I know that he 
very much wants this assessment". Indeed, unlike what 
happens in everyday life, the caregiver, ideally, tends 
to be reflexively conscious of what is affecting her/ 
him in the relationship with the patient, so as to use 
this information to build her/his diagnosis. Therefore, 
understanding the productive facet of caregivers' 
activity, in its experiential dimension, and the way it 
is articulated with its constructive facet, may be con­
sidered during caregivers' training, mainly to give 
them keys to realize how they can build fruitful rela­
tionships with patients. For instance, light may be 
shed on the ways in which they can turn their atten­
tion to the atmosphere of a meeting with a new 
patient, the issue(s) possibly hidden behind the expli­
cit motive for consultation, etc. We think that such 
considerations could help to shift from sometimes 
contrived and administratively constrained meetings 
to more qualitative and beneficial encounters.
The healthcare system as a scene for caregiving
A phenomenology of taking care is to be framed in 
the context in which caregivers' work and experience 
pressure to perform from their institutions. The envir­
onment of a first meeting does not suppress how 
socio-economic variables affect clinical practice in 
many countries today. Caregivers meet patients 
within a hyper-regulated health system, which is 
dominated by capitalistic principles and conditioned 
by the "tyranny of bureaucracy" (Dejours, 2007). This 
leaves little time to "truly encounter" a patient during 
a meeting.
The Covid-19 pandemic has exposed the deleter­
ious effects of this system, and how caregivers often 
support others at the expense of their own wellbeing. 
In their phenomenographic study about the presence 
of health care professionals during their encounter 
with patients, Osterman and Schwartz-Barcott (1996) 
showed that they can be present in different ways, 
from being physically present but emotionally absent 
to being entirely present emotionally speaking and 
fully focused on the patient. The quality of presence 
12
C. COUPÉ AND M. OLLAGNIER-BELDAME

of caregivers with their patients is negatively 
impacted by their stress level, which then affects the 
quality of care delivered. Such stress and feeling of
being under pressure have increased since the begin­
ning of the pandemic (Aledeh & Adam, 2020; Dullius 
et al., 2021; Morley et al., 2020). The interactions 
between caregivers and their patients are techno­
cratic, and thereby routinized and strictly controlled, 
yet focused contextually on individual action. In the 
current pandemic context, on the one hand routines 
have been broken while, on the other hand, the work­
load has considerably increased, due to the large 
number of patients.
In our opinion, an answer to the previous issues, 
besides decreasing the overregulation and bureaucracy- 
induced stress, is to support caregivers through reflec­
tive practice so that they can express their sensations, 
feelings and thoughts about the care provided, beyond 
technical aspects and relational considerations. This is 
necessary both for the maintenance of a certain quality 
of care and for the caregivers' own health. Importantly, it 
can be facilitated using analytical data from an experi­
ential approach as we have proposed. Knowledge aris­
ing from experiential research indeed enhances 
a holistic understanding of caregivers' practice and 
expertise. It can show in particular how the finesse of 
this expertise is actually nestled in the folds of their pre- 
reflective activity. Highlighting this important aspect 
carries implications for future training in clinical practice 
and suggests finding more opportunities and space for 
caregivers to contact with their lived experience and 
learn from its multiple facets. Becoming more aware of 
how and why one reacts in front of a patient, under­
standing retrospectively why a moment decision was 
taken or a quick judgement was made, can help to fine- 
tune one's behaviour and expertise. In short, reflectivity 
can enhance reflexivity. Beyond that, it may also assuage 
a caregiver's need to find out who s/he truly is in front of 
a patient.
Conclusion
We have tried in this paper to better understand 
what is at play in caregivers' daily practices with 
their patients, in particular when it comes to the 
establishment 
of 
both 
a 
diagnosis 
and 
a therapeutic alliance—which are at the core of 
the finalized activity of caregiving. Relying on 
micro-phenomenology and the explicitation inter­
view, we have especially investigated the subjec­
tive experience of taking care of someone else in 
the first few moments of the first meeting. We 
have highlighted how the caregiver-patient rela­
tionship is structured experientially, notably via 
micro-experiential 
phenomena 
that 
we 
have 
described at the diachronic and synchronic levels. 
We have attempted to organize these phenomena 
with categories of acts, scopes of acts, and experi­
ential modalities. At a finer-grained level, we have 
identified a number of objects of attention and 
acts. What emerges from this approach is the 
importance of gathering not only outer but also 
inner information about the patient, of the multi­
ple factors involved in assessing this patient's case 
besides direct observation and listening, and of 
silently 
regulating 
one's 
activity. 
The 
pre- 
reflective mode of consciousness plays here an 
important role, which can only be revealed with 
a first-person approach. In front of the challenges 
faced by caregivers, these results suggest develop­
ing a reflexive practice which includes what the 
reflective study of lived experience has to offer.
Funding
The authors are grateful to the ASLAN project (ANR-10- 
LABX-0081) of the Université de Lyon, for its financial sup­
port within the French program "Investments for the 
Future" operated by the National Research Agency (ANR).
Endnotes
1. We follow Vermersch (2017), who distinguishes 
between reflection and reflexivity: reflection is the first 
step of awareness according to Piaget (1977). It is the 
transformation of an experience, which was only lived, 
into a representation. Reflexivity, on the other hand, 
means using the lived experience as an object of 
knowledge after it has been represented.
2. For us, and according to Depraz et al. (2003, p. 2), 
"experience is always that which a singular subject is 
subjected to at any given time and place, that to which 
s/he has access 'in the first person'".
3. We adopt Petitmengin (2007)'s definition of pre-reflective 
dimension when she writes (p. 55) "We use the term 'pre- 
reflective' in order to emphasize the fact that this dimen­
sion is not unconscious, but only not yet conscious".
4. The distinction between deliberate strategies and spon­
taneous reactions is over-simplistic. A continuum along 
various degrees of intention would be a more sensible 
representation.
5. In this verbatim as well as in the following ones, we 
have added punctuation for the sake of readability. We 
are aware that this differs from standard rules of tran­
scription, which we have followed with our recordings.
Notes on contributors
Christophe Coupé holds a master of science in computer 
science from the Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon and 
a master and PhD in cognitive science from the University 
of Lyon. He worked from 2003 to 2018 as a CNRS researcher 
at the Laboratoire Dynamique du Langage (DDL) in Lyon. 
Since September 2018, he is an Assistant Professor in the 
Department of Linguistics at The University of Hong Kong. 
His research interests span over the fields of cognitive 
science, linguistics, computer science and statistics. He has 
published mostly on language evolution and language 
diversity, 
usually 
with 
computational 
and 
statistical 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF QUALITATIVE STUDIES ON HEALTH AND WELL-BEING
13

methodologies, but also with psycholinguistic experiments. 
He has also been investigating lived experience, especially 
in He has also been investigating lived experience, espe­
cially in the field of health, using micro-phenomenological 
interviews as a data collection tool.
Magali Ollagnier-Beldame holds a PhD in Cognitive Science 
from the University of Lyon in France (2006) and joined the 
French National Centre for Scientific Research in 2012. As a 
researcher in the field of human interactions, she is inter­
ested in the emergence and the creation of 'shared worlds', 
especially in situations of interaction between two people. 
She is leading a scientific program on intersubjectivity with 
a micro-phenomenological approach, using first-person 
interview epistemology and methodology. She is the foun­
der (in 2014) and a co-chair of the Thésée Project (THeories 
and Explorations of Subjectivity and Explicited Experience). 
The main goals of this project are better understanding 
intersubjectivity 'from inside' and exploring the conditions 
under which an experience can be shared by two persons. 
She investigates the ways these processes unfold and are 
co-constructed through interaction, in their affective, cogni­
tive, and sensory dimensions. In the field of health, she 
especially studies first meetings between caregivers and 
patients. Magali Ollagnier-Beldame is also a certified trainer 
in explicitation techniques (GREX - Research group in expli­
citation) and a counsellor in Focusing and Person-centred 
Approach (IFEF - Francophone European Focusing Institute).
Acknowledgments
We wish to thank Anne Cazemajou for her help with the 
interviews and their analysis, the caretakers who kindly 
agreed to participate in our study, and the two anonymous 
reviewers who greatly helped us with their comments and 
suggestions to improve the quality and depth of this article.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the 
author(s).
ORCID
Christophe Coupé 
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-3323-9742
Magali Ollagnier-Beldame 
http://orcid.org/0000-0001- 
8278-5195
References
Aledeh, M., & Adam, P. H. (2020). Caring for dementia care­
givers in times of the COVID-19 crisis: A systematic 
review. American Journal of Nursing Research, 8(5), 
552-561. https://doi.org/10.12691/ajnr-8-5-8
Ardito, R. B., & Rabellino, D. (2011). Therapeutic alliance 
and outcome of psychotherapy: Historical excursus, 
measurements, and prospects for research. Frontiers in 
Psychology, 2, 270. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2011. 
00270
Assal, J.-P., Golay, A., & Visser, A. P. (1995). New trends in 
patient education: A trans-cultural and inter-disease 
approach : Proceedings of the patient education 2000 con­
gress, geneva, 1-4 June 1994. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Barber, J. P., Connolly, M. B., Crits-Christoph, P., Gladis, L., & 
Siqueland, L. (2000). Alliance predicts patients' outcome 
beyond in-treatment change in symptoms. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68(6), 1027-1032. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-006x.68.6.1027
Beach, W. A., Easter, D. W., Good, J. S., & Pigeron, E. 
(2005). Disclosing and responding to cancer "fears" 
during 
oncology 
interviews. 
Social 
Science 
& 
Medicine, 60(4), 893-910. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socs 
cimed.2004.06.031
Bertrand, L., Lejoyeux, M., & Geoffroy, P. A. (2021). 
Republication: Impact de la pandémie COVID-19 sur 
le sommeil du personnel soignant. Médecine Du 
Sommeil, 18(4), 173-178. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
msom.2021.10.032
Burloud, A. (1927). La Pensée conceptuelle, essai de psycholo­
gie générale. Thèse principale pour le doctorat es-lettres, 
Faculté des lettres de l'Université de Lyon. Alcan.
Couitchéré, L., Coze, C., Cissé, L., André, N., Nigué, L., & 
Aholi, J.-M. (2019). Analysis of diagnosis announce­
ments in Abidjan pediatric oncology unit 2 years 
after introduction of the African Pediatric cancer 
announcement guideline. Archives de Pédiatrie, 26(6), 
352-357. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arcped.2019.06.006
Cuvelier, L. (2018). Never the first time on a patient: The 
stakes of high-fidelity simulation for safety training. 
Development and Learning in Organizations, 32(5), 23- 
25 https://doi.org/10.1108/DLO-09-2018-131doi:.
Daniellou, F., & Rabardel, P. (2005). Activity-oriented 
approaches 
to 
ergonomics: 
Some 
traditions 
and 
communities. Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics Science, 6 
( 5 ) ,  3 5 3 - 3 5 7 .  h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 0 8 0 /  
14639220500078351
De Sousa Santos, B. (2018). The end of the cognitive empire: 
The coming of age of epistemologies of the south. Duke 
University Press. https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctv125jqvn
Dejours, C. (2007). Conjurer la violence: Travail, violence et 
santé. Éditions Payot & Rivages.
Denis, J. (2016). Evaluation of therapeutic processes in clinical 
crisis intervention. experts' lived experiences of therapeutic 
action. University of Mons.
Depraz, N. (2014). Première, deuxième, troisième personne. 
Zeta Books.
Depraz, N., Varela, F., & Vermersch, P. (2003). On becoming 
aware 
(Amsterdam, 
Philadelphia: 
John 
Benjamins 
Publishing Company). https://doi.org/10.1075/aicr.43
Devereux, G. (1973). Psychoanalysis 
and 
the 
occult. 
International Universities Press.
Dieumegard, G., Nogry, S., Ollagnier-Beldame, M., & 
Perrin, N. (2021 Lived experience as a unit of analysis 
for the study of learning). In Learning, culture, and social 
interaction, 31 (Part B), 100345. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
lcsi.2019.100345
Dullius, W. R., Secchi, Á., & Scortegagna, S. A. (2021). 
Psychological effects of the pandemic on caregivers of 
older adults: A rapid systematic review. Research, Society 
and Development, 10(8), e13210817125. https://doi.org/ 
10.33448/rsd-v10i8.17125
Faingold, N. (1997). Contre-exemple et recadrage en analyse 
de pratiques. In P. Vermersch & M. Maurel (Eds.), Pratiques 
de l'entretien d'explicitation. ESF.
Franc-Guimond, J., & Hogues, V. (2021). Burnout among 
caregivers in the era of the COVID-19 pandemic: 
Insights and challenges. Canadian Urological Association 
Journal, 15(6 S1), S16-S19. https://doi.org/10.5489/CUAJ. 
7224
14
C. COUPÉ AND M. OLLAGNIER-BELDAME

Garfinkel, H. (1967). Studies in ethnomethodology. Prentice- 
Hall.
Gendlin, E. T. 1978 Focusing . (1st edition), Vol. . New York: 
Everest House.
Gendlin, E. T. (1997). Experiencing and the creation of mean­
ing (1962). Northwestern University Press. https://doi.org/ 
10.1037/t29376-000
Giorgi, A. (2009). The descriptive phenomenological method in 
psychology: A modified husserlian approach. Duquesne 
University Press.
Good, B. (1994). Medicine, rationality, and experience. 
Cambridge University Press.
Gusdorf, 
G. 
(1951). 
Mémoire 
et 
personne. 
Presses 
Universitaires de France.
Henry, J. (2019). Commentary 2: "neither ill will nor 
a deliberate intention: What focus groups say about pro­
fessional practices in hospitals. Journal of Empirical 
Research on Human Research Ethics, 14(5), 498-500. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1556264619831889b
Hurlburt, R. T., & Heavey, C. L. (2006). Exploring inner experi­
ence: The descriptive experience sampling method. John 
Benjamins. https://doi.org/10.1075/aicr.64
Husserl, E. (1933). Cartesian meditations: An introduction to 
phenomenology, translation by Dorion Cairns. Martinus 
Nijhoff Publishers.
Kelly, M. A., Nixon, L., McClurg, C., Scherpbier, A., King, N., & 
Dornan, T. (2018). Experience of touch in health care: A 
meta-ethnography across the health care professions. 
Qualitative Health Research, 28(2), 200-212. https://doi. 
org/10.1177/1049732317707726
Lechopier, N. (2020). Les "patients partenaires" : Une manière de se 
réapproprier la médecine ?. Revue Silence 485 , 10-12 https:// 
halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/halshs-02430246.
Legrand, T. (2020). Coronavirus : Le retour de la théorie du 
"care." L'Edito Politique. https://www.franceinter.fr/emis 
sions/l-edito-politique/l-edito-politique-08-avril-2020
Legros, C. (). Le souci de l'autre, un retour de l'éthique du 
"care." Le Monde May 2 . https://www.lemonde.fr/idees/ 
article/2020/05/01/le-souci-de-l-autre-un-retour-de-l-ethi 
que-du-care_6038332_3232.html
Macewan, G. H. (2008). The efforts of therapists in the first 
session to establish a therapeutic alliance. University of 
Massachusetts Amherst.
McAllister, M. M., Matarasso, B. J., Dixon, B., & Shepperd, C. 
(2004). Conversation starters: Re-examining and recon­
structing 
first 
encounters 
within 
the 
therapeutic 
relationship. Journal of Psychiatric and Mental Health 
Nursing, 11(5), 575-582. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365- 
2850.2004.00763.x
Messer, A. (1906). . In Experimentell-psychologische untersu­
chungen über das Denken . Vol. VIII Archiv für Psychologie 
(Würzburg: Psychologischen Institut der Universität 
Würzburg) 224 .
Miller, G. A., Galanter, E., & Pribram, K. H. (1960). Plans and 
the structure of behavior. Holt, Rhinehart, & Winston.
Morley, G., Sese, D., Rajendram, P., & Horsburgh, C. C. (2020). 
Addressing caregiver moral distress during the COVID-19 
pandemic. Cleveland Clinic Journal of Medicine, 1-5. 
https://doi.org/10.3949/ccjm.87a.ccc047
Moscovici, S. (2000). Social representations: Explorations in 
social psychology. Polity Press.
Nisbett, R. E., & Wilson, T. D. (1977). Telling more than we can know: 
Verbal reports on mental processes. Psychological Review, 84(3), 
231-259. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.84.3.231
Ollagnier-Beldame, M., & Cazemajou, A. (2019). Intersubjectivity in 
first encounters between healthcare practitioners and patients: 
Micro-phenomenology as a way to study lived experience. The 
Humanistic Psychologist, 47(4), 404-425. https://doi.org/10.1037/ 
hum0000133
Osterman, P., & Schwartz-Barcott, D. (1996). Presence: Four 
ways of being there. Nursing Forum, 31(2), 23-30. https:// 
doi.org/10.1111/j.1744-6198.1996.tb00490.x
Pappa, S., Ntella, V., Giannakas, T., & Giannakoulis, V. G. 
(2020). Prevalence of depression, anxiety, and insomnia 
among healthcare workers during the COVID-19 pan­
demic: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Brain, 
Behaviour, and Immunity, 88(January), 901-907. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.bbi.2020.05.026
Pauen, M. (2012). The second-person perspective. Inquiry, 55 
(1), 33-49. https://doi.org/10.1080/0020174X.2012.643623
Petitmengin, C. (2001 L'expérience intuitive (: Paris: 
L'Harmattan)). . 384.
Petitmengin, C. (2006). Describing one's subjective experi­
ence in the second person. An interview method for the 
science of consciousness. Phenomenology and the 
Cognitive Sciences, 5(3-4), 229-269. https://doi.org/10. 
1007/s11097-006-9024-0
Petitmengin, C. (2007). Towards the source of thoughts. The 
gestural and transmodal dimension of lived experience. 
Journal of Consciousness Studies, 14(3), 54-82.
Petitmengin, C., Remillieux, A., Cahour, B., & Carter-Thomas, S. 
(2013). A gap in Nisbett and Wilson's findings? A first-person 
access to our cognitive processes. Consciousness and Cognition, 
22(2), 654-669. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2013.02.004
Petitmengin, C., Remillieux, A., & Valenzuela-Moguillansky, C. 
(2019). Discovering the structures of lived experience. 
Towards a micro-phenomenological analysis method. 
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 18(4), 691-730. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11097-018-9597-4
Piaget, J. (1974). La prise de conscience. Presses Universitaires de 
France.
Piaget, J. (1977). Recherches sur l'abstraction réfléchissante, 
tome 2, tome xxxv des Études d'épistémologie génétique. 
Presses Universitaires de France.
Przyrembel, M., & Singer, T. (2018). Experiencing medita­
tion - Evidence for differential effects of three contem­
plative mental practices in micro-phenomenological 
interviews. Consciousness and Cognition, 62, 82-101. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2018.04.004
Rabardel, P. (2005). Instrument, activité et développement 
du pouvoir d'agir. In P. Lorino & R. Teulier (Eds.), Entre 
connaissance et organisation : L'activité collective (pp. 
251-265). La Découverte.
Rogers, C. R. (1957). The necessary and sufficient conditions of 
therapeutic personality change. Journal of Consulting 
Psychology, 21(2), 95-103. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0045357
Röing, M., Holmström, I. K., & Larsson, J. (2018). 
A metasynthesis of phenomenographic articles on under­
standings of work among healthcare professionals. 
Qualitative Health Research, 28(2), 273-291. https://doi. 
org/10.1177/1049732317719433
Roth, A., & Fonagy, P. (2006). What works for Whom? A critical 
review of psychotherapy research. The Guilford Press.
Saldaña, J. (2011). Fundamentals of qualitative research (1st 
Edition) ed.). Oxford University Press.
Schacter, D. (2001). The seven sins of memory. Houghton Mifflin.
Sexton, H., Littauer, H., Sexton, A., & Tømmerås, E. (2005). Building 
an alliance: Early therapy process and the client-therapist con­
nection. Psychotherapy Research, 15(1-2), 103-116. https://doi. 
org/10.1080/10503300512331327083
Shear, J., & Varela, F. (1999). The view from within. first-person 
approaches to the study of consciousness. Imprint Academic.
Siksou, M., & . (2008). Georges Libman Engel (1913-1999). Le 
modèle biopsychosocial et la critique du réductionnisme 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF QUALITATIVE STUDIES ON HEALTH AND WELL-BEING
15

biomédical. Le Journal Des Psychologues, 260(7), 52-55. 
https://doi.org/10.3917/jdp.260.0052
Stern, D. N. (1983 Affect attunement J. D. Call; E. Galenson; R. L. 
Tyson). . Frontiers of Infant Psychiatry (vol . 2), (New York: Basic 
Books), .
Stern, D. N. (2004). The present moment in psychotherapy and 
everyday life. W. W. Norton & Company.
Tronto, J. (2009). Un monde vulnérable, pour une politique du care 
(moral boundaries : A political argument for an ethic of care, 
1993), traduit de l'anglais par Hervé Maury. La Découverte.
Valenzuela-Moguillansky, C., & Vásquez-Rosati, A. (2019). An 
analysis procedure for the micro-phenomenological 
interview. Constructivist Foundations, 14(2), 123-145 
https://constructivist.info/14/2/123.valenzuela.
Vargas-Schaffer, G., & Cogan, J. (2014). Patient therapeutic edu­
cation: Placing the patient at the centre of the WHO analgesic 
ladder. Canadian Family Physician, 60(3), 235-241.
Vermersch, P. (1994). L'entretien d'explicitation en formation initi­
ale et en formation continue. Editions Sociales Françaises.
Vermersch, P. 2000a. Approche du singulier. In centre de 
recherche sur la formation du conservatoire national 
des arts et métiers. Ed., L'Analyse de la singularité de 
l'action (pp. 239-266).Presses Universitaires de France. 
https://doi.org/10.3917/puf.derec.2000.01.0239
Vermersch, P. (2000b). Conscience directe et conscience 
réfléchie. Intellectica, 2(31), 269-311 https://doi.org/10. 
3406/intel.2000.1609.
Vermersch, P. (2008). Décrire la pratique de l'introspection. 
Expliciter, 77, 33-59 https://www.grex2.com/assets/files/ 
expliciter/77%202008%20pv%20decrire%20introspection. 
pdf.
Vermersch, P. (2012). Explicitation et phénoménologie. 
Presses Universitaires de France.
Vermersch, P. (2017). L'entretien d'explicitation (coll. psychol­
ogies et psychothérapies). ESF.
Vignaud, P., & Prieto, N. (2020). Psychological impact of the 
COVID-19 pandemic on health care professionals. 
Actualites Pharmaceutiques, 59(599), 51-53. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.actpha.2020.08.013
World Medical Association. (2013 Declaration of Helsinki: 
ethical principles for medical research involving 
human subjects). Journal of the American Medical 
Association 310 20 2191-2194 https://doi.org/10. 
1001/jama.2013.281053 .
16
C. COUPÉ AND M. OLLAGNIER-BELDAME

Appendix: Original verbatim in French
Table I. Categories and scopes of acts performed by the caregiver appearing in the verbatim of the interviews, with 
corresponding illustrations in French and their English translation.
Category of 
acts
Scope of acts
Example of verbatim 
(in French)
Example of verbatim (translated to English)
Gathering  
information
Outer  
Information 
on the other
j'vois quelqu'un (un peu effrayé) qui repose précipitamment 
un magazine une bd ou une revue sur le porte-revues 
sur la table basse qui attrape son manteau
I see someone (a bit scared) who hastily puts back 
a magazine a comic book or a journal in the magazine 
rack on the coffee table who grabs her coat
Inner 
Information 
on oneself
y a comme une chaleur dans un coin de ma tête
There is like some heat in a corner of my head
Inner 
Information 
on the other
il y a une résonance/c'est dans mon corps/je sens qu'il y a 
un vide là où est l'autre
There is a resonance/it's in my body/I feel there's an 
emptiness where the other is
Assessing
Oneself
j'me dis que j'suis pas la personne que les gens pensent que 
j'suis à ce moment-là
I tell myself that I'm not the person that people think I am 
at this moment
The other
je trouve que le père et le fils se ressemblent beaucoup 
(rires)
I find that the father and the son are a lot alike (laughs)
The relation
je me dis tiens là il va y avoir quelque chose de dynamique 
je sens que l'entretien va être dynamique (. . .) c'est vécu 
par tout le corps
I tell myself "ah" there's going to be something dynamic 
I feel that the appointment is going to be dynamic (. . .) 
It's something experienced by the whole body
The situation
je me dis que ça va être encore une histoire difficile à 
entendre
I tell myself that once again this is going to be a difficult 
story to hear
Performing 
actions
Regulations 
(on oneself)
j'essaie de garder cette attitude rassurante à son égard en 
me disant que c'est aussi comme ça que ce qui va suivre 
sera de bonne qualité
I try to keep this reassuring attitude towards him while 
telling myself that it's also like this that what come 
afterwards will be of good quality
Interventions 
(on the 
other)
avec le regard je vais chercher ce qu'il amène lui à ce 
moment-là
By looking, I collect what he himself brings at that 
moment
Others
je me mets aussi à me tortiller
I also start to squirm
Table II. Experiential modalities for the caregiver with corresponding examples of verbatim in French and their English 
translation.
Experiential 
modality
Example of verbatim 
(in French)
Example of verbatim 
(translated to English)
Visual
il avait le regard assez réveillé des yeux clairs assez lumineux il n'a 
pas le regard éteint
His gaze was alert his eyes bright and shining his gaze is not 
lifeless
Auditory
j'ai perçu à ce moment-là qu'il a un gros trouble d'articulation
I perceived at that moment that he had a severe articulatory 
disorder
Tactile
je prête attention (. . .) à la poignée de main en fait
I actually pay attention (. . .) to the handshake
Extra- 
sensory
il n'existe pas (. . .) si j'essayais de le toucher il n'y aurait pas de 
texture ça s'effondrerait ou ça serait un fantôme je passerais à 
travers c'est une sensation que l'autre n'a pas de substance
He doesn't exist (. . .) If I tried to touch him there would be no 
texture it would fall apart or it would be a ghost and I would 
pass through it it's a feeling that the other person has no 
substance
Feelings
je sens que il y a une détente des bras et là je sens même qu'il y a 
une détente au niveau des épaules une ouverture près des 
clavicules
I feel that the arms relax and then I even feel that the shoulders 
relax there is an opening near the clavicles
Inner speech
je me dis tiens là il va y avoir quelque chose de dynamique
I tell myself "ah" there's going to be something dynamic
(Outer) 
Speech
je dis ok moi je suis prête pour travailler avec vous sur le viol
I say ok I am ready to work with you about the rape
Motor 
activity
c'est moi qui ai ouvert la porte
I am the one who opened the door
Embodied  
judgement
il y a cette idée un petit peu globale de ah tiens ils présentent bien 
tous les deux
There is this slightly global idea of "ah" both of them are making 
a good impression
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF QUALITATIVE STUDIES ON HEALTH AND WELL-BEING
17

