Exemplaria
Medieval, Early Modern, Theory
ISSN: 1041-2573 (Print) 1753-3074 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/yexm20
The Phenomenology of Attention in Julian of
Norwich's A Revelation of Love
Michael Raby
To cite this article: Michael Raby (2014) The Phenomenology of Attention in Julian of Norwich's
A Revelation of Love, Exemplaria, 26:4, 347-367, DOI: 10.1179/1041257314Z.00000000058
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1179/1041257314Z.00000000058
Published online: 29 Sep 2014.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 706
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=yexm20

© W. S. Maney & Son Ltd 2014 
DOI 10.1179/1041257314Z.00000000058
exemplaria: medieval, early modern, theory, Vol. 26 No. 4, Winter 2014, 347-67
The Phenomenology of Attention 
in Julian of Norwich's A Revelation 
of Love
Michael Raby
University of Toronto, Canada
Julian of Norwich's A Revelation of Love develops a sophisticated phenom-
enology of attention. Understanding the key role that attention plays in 
Julian's thought illuminates some of the most vexing questions that con-
front readers of her text, including her idiosyncratic adaptation of Augus-
tine's categories of bodily and spiritual sight. A Revelation of Love describes 
how Julian's attention is turned and sustained, as well as distracted, by 
the phenomena that arise through the course of her revelations. In her 
reflections, she articulates both the anticipatory and retentive modalities of 
attention. She also acknowledges the limits of attention, particularly how 
pain can frustrate attempts to "pass over" the body. A Revelation of Love 
not only engages with contemporary philosophical and theological debates, 
but it can also help to historicize our understanding of both attention and 
phenomenology.
keywords Julian of Norwich, A Revelation of Love, Augustine, phenomenology, 
attention, time, pain
In May 1373, the woman known to us as Julian of Norwich received a revelation. 
She received sixteen of them, to be precise, each successive one related to the first, a 
striking vision of Christ bleeding on the crucifix. Much of the meaning of the revela-
tions only became clear in retrospect, after a period of meditation and rumination 
guided by moments of divine illumination. When Julian is unable to understand 
fully the significance of a detailed scene in one of her revelations, she receives some 
inner advice: "It longeth to the to take hede to alle the propertes and the condetions 
that were shewed in the example, though the thinke that it be misty and indefferent 
to thy sight" (51.74-76).1 Pay attention, the voice urges. This imperative echoes 
throughout A Revelation of Love. In the analysis that follows, I explore Julian's 
complex phenomenology of attention — the ways in which her focus is turned, 
sustained, lost, and recovered. 

348
MICHAEL RABY
In his famous 1936 essay "The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduc-
tion," Walter Benjamin argued that the various technological and economic changes 
associated with modernity had altered the way people perceive their environment: 
distraction, as opposed to contemplation, was now the dominant mode of perception. 
In the years since Benjamin's essay, particularly with the proliferation of new forms 
of technology and the emergence of Attention Deficit Disorder (or ADD), the dis-
tracted nature of contemporary life has become somewhat of a truism, a condition 
analyzed and frequently lamented by critics of various ideological and methodological 
stripes. Much of the discourse addressing distraction as a cultural problem presup-
poses that earlier forms of Western culture experienced attention differently. In 
his study of attention in the late nineteenth century, Jonathan Crary argues that 
Benjamin and other modernist thinkers see distraction as symptomatic of the frag-
mented quality of modernity, the result of "a process of fragmentation and destruc-
tion in which premodern forms of wholeness and integrity were irretrievably broken 
up or degraded through technological, urban, and economic reorganizations" (48). 
Crary challenges this tenacious historical narrative by arguing that the association of 
modernity and distraction was itself a by-product of an expanding discursive field, 
one characterized by an explosion of scientific and philosophical interest in questions 
of attention, that aimed at constructing attentive subjects. Crary rightly questions the 
simplistic opposition of premodern contemplation and modern distraction, but his 
insistence on the discontinuity of the modern and premodern recapitulates the thesis 
of the premodern as the site of absorbed contemplation, where subjects are undis-
turbed by the distraction of theoretical reflection on their attentiveness. He claims 
that, prior to the nineteenth century, "[e]ven when attention was an object of philo-
sophical reflection, it was a marginal, at best secondary problem within explanations 
of mind and consciousness that either did not constitutively depend on it or in which 
it was one of a constellation of equally significant and mutually dependent faculties" 
(17-18). We could cite a number of counterexamples, the most obvious being 
St. Augustine, for whom attention was the precondition for both perception and 
recollection.2 Many of the questions identified by Crary as central to scientific inves-
tigations of attention in the late nineteenth century — to what extent is attention 
voluntary or involuntary? How many objects can attention focus on at once? How 
does selective attention work? — were posed by Augustine.3 In Augustine too we find 
a powerful, if aporetic, way to theorize the relation between attention and distraction 
that does not plot the terms as strictly oppositional, as Benjamin does, but as existing 
on a continuum (Ricoeur 21). One of the consequences of treating attention and 
distraction as essentially modern problems is that the theological heritage of these 
concepts is elided. Paul North argues that secular theories of distraction, including 
ADD, must take into account "theological, affective, and political origins . . . in all 
their complex historicality" (55).4 My essay contributes to this project by examining 
the important roles that attention and distraction play in the theology of Julian of 
Norwich.

349
THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF ATTENTION IN JULIAN OF NORWICH'S A REVELATION OF LOVE
This essay is also concerned with the "complex historicality" of one specific codi-
fied form of modern, secular attention — phenomenology. The recent "theological 
turn" in phenomenology brings to the fore questions about the limitations of the 
method when applied to religious experience, and it also highlights how the develop-
ment of phenomenology is shaped by theological sources. One of the most prominent 
thinkers associated with this turn, Jean-Luc Marion, argues that the possibility 
of divine revelation is fair game for phenomenological analysis.5 In fact, he argues 
that revelation is the "saturated phenomenon par excellence" (In Excess xxii). By 
"saturated phenomena," Marion refers to those phenomena that exceed every attempt 
to conceptualize and categorize, those that explode into visibility in a surplus of 
intuition that cannot be reduced without remainder to intention or signification. 
The saturated phenomenon stretches to breaking point the receptive capacities of 
the subject, whom Marion calls l'adonné (translated roughly as "the gifted"). The 
theological paradigm for this refashioned — or we might say, rechristened — 
phenomenological subject is to be found in the Augustinian idea of capax Dei, of the 
soul as fundamentally receptive to the divine gift: "man's only task is to let God 
occur, by offering him the largest possible capacity," a capacity that is stretched by 
desire, or, more precisely, "the infinity of desire, which only God can create" (Mario n, 
Cartesian Questions 87). Marion's theory of the saturated phenomenon emerges in 
large part as a response to Martin Heidegger, whose work, while insisting on the 
explicitly atheological orientation of phenomenology, betrays evidence of a complex, 
ambivalent engagement with theology, especially its medieval incarnations. 
In recent years scholars have demonstrated how Heidegger's early research into 
medieval thought influenced the development of key concepts in his phenomenologi-
cal method.6 For instance, Heidegger's interest in accessing the "pre-theoretical" 
experience of factical life — the singular historical event — emerges in his examina-
tion of Duns Scotus's doctrine of haecceitas (thisness) in his 1915 Habilitationsschrift 
(McGrath 110-16). Also around this time he starts to develop the method of "formal 
indication," which, as an alternative to the theoretical attitude, sketches provision-
ally the contours of the "pre-theoretical something" without hardening into objectify-
ing thought (Phenomenology of Religious Life 38-45).7 As scholars have noted, there 
are parallels between "formal indication" and the ways in which mystical theologians 
disclose their singular encounters with the divine (McGrath 134). Heidegger in fact 
praises the mystic's posture of devotion or submission (Hingabe), through which the 
self "is given" over to its experience. In the notes for a lecture series on medieval 
mysticism that he never gave, Heidegger describes the movement as "[t]urning back 
to one's own sphere of experience and paying attention to that which is given in one's 
own consciousness" (Phenomenology of Religious Life 252, trans. modified. Gesam-
tausgabe, vol. 60). For both Marion and Heidegger, the mystical theologian models 
a method and practice that anticipates the phenomenologist's call to return "to the 
things themselves."
The influence of medieval thought extends back to the foundational axiom of phe-
nomenology, the thesis of intentionality. According to Edmund Husserl, conscious-
ness is always consciousness of something. The mind aims at "objects" in thought 

350
MICHAEL RABY
and perception. Phenomenology studies the ways in which consciousness intends the 
given "object." Husserl's theory of intentionality is indebted to the work of his teach-
er Franz Brentano, who had adapted the concept of intentio from the scholastics.8 
The term intentio covered a broad range of meanings by the late medieval period. 
Aquinas defines intentio in its most basic sense: "Intention [intentio] signifies a 
tending to another: that is the very ring of the term" (Summa 12e 12.1). Intentio, he 
explains, is an act of the will. In the work of Aquinas and other medieval thinkers, 
intentio is often best translated as "attention," a semantic overlap that is present in 
Husserl's theorizing of intentionality as well.9 In De Trinitate, Augustine describes 
intentio as the force that keeps the senses fixed on the object of perception or thought; 
it is the active principle that accounts for the soul's ability to focus on specific objects 
that appear in the fields of perception and memory. Glossing Augustine's account of 
perception, Hannah Arendt translates intentio as "Will qua attention" (121). The 
close relation between willing and attending is reflected in the Middle English word 
entenden, which, as used by Julian and her contemporaries, performed a similar 
function to its Latin cognate intenden: it meant "to intend or plan (to do something)," 
as intend does in Modern English, as well as representing the semantic ground now 
occupied by "to attend" (MED, s.v. "entenden").10 A Revelation of Love raises a 
question that Augustine struggles with throughout his work: to what extent is atten-
tion involuntary? How is it that the soul's attention can be commanded both by 
the movement of the will and by external allures? The dialectic between activity and 
passivity — a central feature of medieval accounts of attention — will be a recurring 
theme in this essay. 
In a discussion of what the phrase "I saw" might mean for visionary writing in 
the Middle Ages, Barbara Newman notes a general tendency to suppress traces of 
personal agency. She suggests some possible motivations for this move: 
[One reason] was the link between visionary experience and women, who were often 
deemed too "simple" to speak of the things of God unless they became direct channels of 
his Word. The subtlest but most significant factor may have been the perception of a 
genuine givenness in the experience itself, however deeply it had been desired, solicited, 
or anticipated beforehand. (5)
Many readers of Julian focus on what Vincent Gillespie and Maggie Ross call her 
"poetics of effacement." Scholars have examined how Julian's persona of "a simple 
creature unletterde" and her reticence regarding her sources reflect her precarious 
social position as a female writer (2.1).11 As productive as this line of inquiry has 
been, my essay takes a different tack by focusing on the other factor identified by 
Newman. It argues that Julian practices a form of attentiveness that foregrounds how 
the revelations are given to her and how she receives them. In other words, she is 
attentive to her own attentiveness. As a result of this methodological emphasis, her 
work is rich in phenomenological description.12 Anthony J. Steinbock argues that the 
phenomenological attitude consists of "a peculiar kind of reflective attentiveness . . . 
not merely as a meta-reflection on what something is, but as an inquiry into how or 

351
THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF ATTENTION IN JULIAN OF NORWICH'S A REVELATION OF LOVE
the way in which things are given and our openness to them" (39). Steinbock goes on 
to describe the phenomenological reduction: 
What phenomenology really wants to bracket, then, is a self-imposition so as to let the 
phenomena flash forth as they give themselves; what we become dispassionate about is 
ourselves through a literal dis-position of the self from the scene, and by so doing, dispose 
ourselves to be struck in which ever way the phenomena give themselves. (40; emphasis 
in original)
Julian dis-positions herself not by eradicating all traces of her self-impositions, but 
by registering them in precise detail. She highlights the process of receiving the 
revelations: how she variously anticipates, is enticed by, grasps, misses, and retains 
the bodily and ghostly images that flash through her soul. When Julian declares her 
intention to "sey as I saw," we should hear the emphasis on the "as" (44.5). She not 
only tells us what she saw, she tells us how she saw. 
The process of seeing continued long after the original series of revelations ceased. 
Julian's work is preserved in two extant versions: the longer, more detailed version — 
A Revelation of Love — was likely composed later, the product of sustained reflec-
tion on the events of May 1373 and perhaps even the shorter text itself.13 In both 
texts, Julian chronicles how her understanding of the revelations alters over time. She 
frequently uses the qualifier "in this time" to signal the provisional status of an inter-
pretation; for example, she concludes that Christ's act of redemption will remain a 
mystery until completed, according "to the understanding that I toke of oure lordes 
mening in this time" (32.49-50). The phrasing here is also important. The meaning 
of the revelation comes from Christ and is given to Julian to "take." As Denys Turne r 
points out, Julian's method cannot be adequately explained by the positivist frame-
work underlying certain modern theories of "mysticism" (76). Julian does not frame 
her revelations as the primary datum of experience that must subsequently be con-
ceptualized and interpreted by a subject. A key index of her hermeneutical practice is 
her use of the word "see" to denote acts of both perception and interpretation.14 
Julian receives her revelations as meaningful, full of meanings that shift and deepen 
as she attends more closely to what she has been given. 
In the argument that follows, I chart two interrelated forms of attentiveness 
described by Julian — beseeching and beholding. While beseeching looks ahead to 
what can never be anticipated, beholding attempts to retain the sensory impressions 
that have been given to the soul. I conclude by looking at how Julian represents the 
limits of attention, particularly the body's vulnerability to pain.
Beseeching
A Revelation of Love opens with Julian wondering where to turn her attention. 
Having received "a bodily sicknes" from God, she lies in her bed languishing (3.1). 
She expects to die, but this idea provokes "a great louthsomnes" in her (3.5-6). She 
wants to live longer: "But it was for I would have lived to have loved God better and 
longer time, that I might, by the grace of that living, have the more knowing and 

352
MICHAEL RABY
loving of God in the blisse of heaven" (3.7-11). Nonetheless, she assents fully to 
whatever God wills and prepares to die. After losing feeling from her waist down-
ward, she is propped up in bed and a priest is called to provide solace during what 
appear to be her dying moments. The priest places a crucifix in front of her face, 
advising her to look upon it for comfort. Prior to this, she had her eyes "set upright-
ward into heaven" (3.21). But with the arrival of the crucifix, she switches focus: "But 
nevertheles I ascented to set my eyen in the face of the crucifixe, if I might, and so 
I dide, for methought I might longar dure to looke evenforth then right up" (3.22-24). 
Why does Julian think that looking straight ahead will allow her to endure longer 
than looking upward? It is, of course, less physically taxing to keep one's line of 
vision level than it is to crane upward. But there is more at stake here. The answer 
becomes clearer if we examine how Julian is faced with the same choice in the eighth 
revelation. This time, though, the order of the directions is inverted: as the first seve n 
revelations unfold, she has been staring straight ahead at the crucifix, taking refuge 
in its security against the fiends who swarm around it, when a seemingly friendly 
voice says to her: "Loke uppe to heven to his father" (19.5). Julian responds: 
And than sawe I wele, with the faith that I felt, that ther was nothing betwene the crosse 
and heven that might have dissesede me, and either me behoved to loke uppe or elles to 
answere. I answered inwardly with alle the might of my soule, and said: "Nay, I may not! 
For thou art my heven." This I saide for I wolde not. For I had lever have bene in that 
paine tille domesday, than have come to heven otherwise than by him. (19.5-11)
She will not look up because Christ has come down to earth. The lowering of her 
gaze mirrors Christ's descent into flesh and time. She experiences great pain as she 
watches him suffer — although she is quick to point out that her own pain cannot 
be compared to the intensity of what he undergoes. She wants to endure because 
Christ endured for so long: "And thus saw I oure lorde Jhesu languring long time" 
(20.1). Looking away from Christ would entail overlooking the sense of duration that 
distinguishes Christ's suffering. Above all, it would mean eliding both her and Christ's 
embodiment. Julian desires to suffer with Christ, and she can only do so by "living 
in my deadly body" (3.43). Her desire to remain rooted in her "deadly body" gives 
an initial indication of her refusal throughout A Revelation to subordinate bodily 
sight to spiritual sight.15
The glowing crucifix begins to bleed, initiating the sequence of revelations, which, 
for the most part, keep Julian's eyes focused on the cross. She has been granted what 
she desired so long ago — "a bodely sight" of Christ's passion (2.10). But Julian 
makes clear that no causal relationship links her desire and its fulfillment. There is 
always a temporal gap between the asking and receiving that ensures the gratuity of 
Christ's appearing. Christ appears when he will: "It is Gods will that we seke into 
the beholding of him, for by that shall he shew us himself of his special grace when 
he will" (10.63-65). The value of "seking" or "beseeching" is not diminished if the 
intentio remains unfulfilled. Julian urges her readers: "Pray interly: though thou fele 
nought, though thou se nought, yea, though thou think thou might not" (41.35-36). 

353
THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF ATTENTION IN JULIAN OF NORWICH'S A REVELATION OF LOVE
The act of praying will loosen and stretch the soul, making it "suppul and buxom to 
God" (43.25-26). The collocation of "suppul" and "buxom" appears in a passage 
by one of Julian's contemporaries, Walter Hilton, who, in The Mixed Life, advises 
novices to make the body "souple and redi" by breaking down its "vnbuxumnesse" 
through ascetic exercise (2).16 For Julian, in contrast, it is praying "interly" that makes 
the soul receptive.
The necessity of clearing space for the arrival of God is taken up by Augustine in 
an exegesis of Philippians 3.12-14, an important locus for his theory of intentio.17 
Augustine asks his audience: "What are you doing in this life, then, if you haven't yet 
laid hold?" (In Epistolam Joannis 4.6; Homilies on the First Epistle of John 4.6). He 
replies that the Christian should devote his life to cultivating holy desire: "What you 
desire, however, you don't yet see" (In Epistolam Joannis 4.6; Homilies on the First 
Epistle of John 4.6). He compares the soul to a leather purse that is stretched by 
desire when God withholds what it wants to see. Augustine urges his audience 
to stretch their own purses so that they might increase their capacity to receive God. 
To this end, he cites Paul: "I have forgotten what is behind, I have stretched out 
[extentus] to what is ahead; in accord with the plan [secundum intentionem] I pursue 
the victory of my lofty calling" (In Epistolam Joannis 4.6; Homilies on the First 
Epistle of John 4.6; cf. Phil 3.13-14).18 But first they must empty and cleanse their 
"vessels" of evil, so that the space is fit to receive the inpouring of God's grace. For 
Augustine, as for Julian, the "seking" soul stretche s beyond the present, beyond what 
can be seen with the eyes, and makes room for what is yet to come. Julian also shares 
Augustine's belief that desire for God is itself evidence that the soul has found — or 
rather been found by — God. Christ tells Julian: "I am grounde of thy beseking" 
(41.8). The belatedness of beseeching is captured in Julian's understanding of prayer 
as thanking: "Thanking is a true, inward knowing, with gret reverence and lovely 
drede, turning ourselfe with alle oure mightes into the werking that oure lorde stereth 
us to, enjoyeng and thanking inwardly" (41.45-47). Prayer opens the soul to receive 
further gifts, while at the same time thanking God for the gift that has already 
initiated this turning of attention. 
The kenotic dimension of "seking," its openness to the "not yet," entails a certain 
vulnerability.19 The author of The Cloud of Unknowing compares the newly shriven 
soul to "a clene paper leef" that two parties strive to write upon — God and his 
angels on one side and the devil and his angels on the other. Each individual soul 
must choose which thoughts and "sterings" it will receive — good or evil — and thus 
inscribe: "Bot it is in þe free choise of þe soul to receiue whiche þat it wole" (A Tretis 
of Discrescyon of Spirites 91). Ideally, the soul will inscribe itself with the traces of 
God, and will thus become like the vernicle which, Julian writes, Christ "portrude 
with his owne blessed face" (10.31). Julian is "stered" by God, but also by demonic 
and unidentifiable sources. Closely associated with Richard Rolle's school of affective 
devotion, the verb stiren and its related forms usually signified physical or spiritual 
arousal, but could also mean a turning or change of direction (Staley 136-37). Julian 
dismisses an internal "stering" that questions the value of sin, and later she thinks 
that her final encounter with the devil is intended to "stere" her to despair (27.7; 

354
MICHAEL RABY
69.6). Towards the end of A Revelation, she wonders whether the "lighteninges and 
touchinges" that continued to illuminate the revelations beyond their initial bestowal 
were from "the same spirite that shewed them alle" (65.30-31). At this moment, she 
attempts to exercise the kind of discernment that the Cloud-author advises: "And 
þerfore beware, and proue wel þi sterynges & whens þei come. For houso þou arte 
steryd, wheþer fro wiþinne by grace or fro wiþouten on ape maner, God wote and 
I not" (A Pistle of Discrecioun of Stirings 68). Julian's initial doubt about the authen-
ticity of her revelations comes partly as a result of her inability (at the time) to 
recognize their divine provenance.
The necessity of "proving" the soul's "sterings" emerged from an Augustinian 
tradition that was suspicious of spontaneous emotional reactions (Knuuttila 211). 
Augustine in turn was influenced by Stoic theory, which drew a distinction between 
impressions that impinge upon the soul from outside and the soul's inner response to 
those impressions. As Eugene TeSelle explains, for Augustine, "it is not in our power 
to control what will 'occur to us,' either from external events or through the inward 
association of ideas . . . . What is in our power is how we respond to these impressions 
that 'come to mind'" (321). We can see the influence of the "first motions" theory in 
Hilton's Scale of Perfection. Hilton gives the example of a person beset by "fleschli 
stirynge" and argues that if this person is able to avoid assenting to these impulses, 
then he "synnede not, nameli deedliche" (2.517-37). Nonetheless, Hilton remarks that 
the question of assent is not always so cut and dried; sometimes the person will 
be so overwhelmed by stirrings that he will not know whether he consented or not. 
The central difficulty lies in the fact that the soul is like a "highwai" through which 
all manner of stirrings, voices, and images come and go, clamoring for attention 
(2.2958). 
Much depends, then, on what we decide to keep in mind, what we decide to 
inscribe onto the parchment or fabric of our souls. Intentio, according to Augustine, 
not only turns the sense (either physical or spiritual) toward the object to be sensed, 
but then fixes the sense on the object, thereby endowing the act of perception with 
duration (De Trinitate 11.2.5). Distraction (distentio) occurs when the mind turns 
away from proper objects and fixes onto improper ones. The Scholastic theologian 
Peter Lombard argues that prolonged focus on a pleasurable impulse constitutes 
consent in itself: to avoid committing sin, one must expel improper thoughts imme-
diately by directing one's attention elsewhere (Knuuttila 212-13). For Julian, culpabil-
ity is similarly not determined so much by what comes to mind as by what stays in 
mind. For instance, when the "eye of the soule" is visited by images of other people's 
sins, it should avert its gaze: "The soule that wille be in rest, when other mennes 
sinnes come to minde he shuld fle it as the paine of helle, seking into God for remedye 
for helpe againe that" (76.10-11). Beholding the sins of other people clouds and dis-
torts the mind's eye. On the other hand, when the soul is graced by the sight of Christ, 
it should attempt to preserve the showing by beholding diligently: "[W]han oure 
curtesse lorde of his special grace sheweth himselfe to oure soule, we have that we 
desyer. And then we se not for the time what we shulde more pray, but all oure entent 
with alle our mightes is set hole into the beholding of him" (43.15-18). Julian has 

355
THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF ATTENTION IN JULIAN OF NORWICH'S A REVELATION OF LOVE
now "laid hold," as Augustine puts it. Whether one uses the eyes of the body or the 
soul, beholding is the proper response to the gracious fulfillment of beseeching.
Beholding
Sarah McNamer argues that, despite its prominence in Middle English devotional 
writing, the term beholding has received short shrift from critics, who tend to view 
it merely as another synonym for words like seeing and gazing (134-42). She posits 
that beholding describes a particular kind of seeing — one that is highly empathetic 
and socially coded as feminine. McNamer bolsters her interpretation by demonstrat-
ing how Nicholas Love's English translation of the influential Pseudo-Bonaventurian 
Meditations on the Life of Christ distinguishes between "lookers" and "beholders," 
with the former representing an aggressive masculine gaze devoid of compassion. 
I think Julian would agree with McNamer's thesis that she has an obligation to 
behold, not look, at Christ's passion, even if Julian's use of the word "beholding" is 
not as unequivocal as McNamer's argument would have it.20 Julian also appears 
mindful of the etymological and/or morphological connection between biholden and 
holden that McNamer identifies: Middle English biholden ultimately descends from 
the Old English healden, a derivation underscored by the tendency for the past tense 
of biholden to be shortened to held in Middle English. By the late fourteenth century, 
McNamer continues, biholden "implies a movement outward: it appears to function 
as a prompt to reach out and hold" (136). This section builds upon McNamer's fruit-
ful attempt at historical phenomenology by exploring how beholding is represented 
in A Revelation, a text she mentions only in passing. 
If beseeching anticipates what is yet to come, beholding activates the retentional 
aspect of attention. Husserl uses the term im Griff behalten (retaining-in-grasp or 
be-holding) to describe how consciousness keeps hold of the traces of the recent past. 
When I hear a melody, writes Husserl, I am able to follow the trajectory of the notes 
because I retain in the present moment the traces of the notes that have come before. 
If I were to attempt to recollect (as opposed to be-hold) these earlier notes, my atten-
tion would turn from the present object and become focused on, and thus distracted 
by, the past object. The combination of receptivity and holding leads him to describe 
this process as "passivity in activity" (Experience and Judgment 109-12). According 
to Edward S. Casey, Husserl's be-holding "consists in a holding-in-mind of recently 
experienced objects and states of affairs whenever they remain impressionally present 
(e.g., a sound continuing to sound as we retain-in-grasp its earlier phases) or have 
become non-impressional altogether . . . . [T]he achievement of retaining-in-grasp is 
always a coincidence or overlapping" (44). Augustine describes a similar process of 
retention in Confessions, when he uses the example of hearing a hymn to argue that 
attention lends duration to the present (11.27.35). The words of the hymn cannot be 
heard simultaneously; it is only because the mind can collect each passing sound 
through stretching itself that it can generate the experience of listening to one unified 
and enduring object.21 Both Husserl and Augustine point to the way in which the past 
is always implicated in the present, how perception is imbricated in memory. 

356
MICHAEL RABY
As a form of attentiveness, beholding in A Revelation of Love generates a sense 
of "coincidence and overlap" that is constitutive of Husserl's be-holding. The 
various modalities of sight that Julian experiences — bodily, ghostly, and variations 
thereof — constantly overlap. Yet Julian carefully acknowledges their distinctions. 
For instance, the beholding of the lord and servant scene occurs on two levels: 
"gostly in bodely liknesse" and "more gostly withoute bodely liknes" (51.4-5). The 
vision begins on the first level and then her understanding is led onto the second 
level. She then returns to the more bodily realm: "And now was my understanding 
ledde againe into the furst, both keping in mind" (51.38-39, emphasis added). A 
layering takes place here, as her mind stretches to "keep" both visions. In Middle 
English, the word keep was often used as a synonym for attention.22 The "more 
gostly" perceptions remain, as if they were afterimages on her mind's eye, ready to 
be superimposed onto the bodily sights. At other times, the shuttling between levels 
of sight seems to occur simultaneously, such as when she sees the ghostly Virgin 
against the bodily backdrop of Christ's bleeding body: "And in alle that time that he 
shewd this that I have now saide in gostely sight, I saw the bodely sight lasting of the 
plentuous bleding of the hede" (7.9-10). Julian's attention is evenly divided between 
ghostly and bodily sights. She inevitably runs up against the limits of language in 
trying to represent the simultaneity of the two layers of sight, however. Since lan-
guage proceeds successively — "by processe," as she would say (65.32) — Julian must 
describe one of the sights first (the ghostly image of the Virgin) and then rely on the 
adverbial phrase "in alle that time" to redirect readers' attention backwards, so 
that they may retrospectively fill in their mental representation of the scene with the 
added layer of Christ's bleeding body. Readers end up enacting the process of reten-
tion that Husserl and Augustine describe; they are able to achieve a semblance of 
simultaneity by retaining the traces of the images generated by the words that came 
earlier and hold them in conjunction with the images that follow subsequently.
Beholding, for Julian, is generative, marked by what Husserl calls "associative 
awakening," the tendency for present perceptions to activate sedimented or forgotten 
retentions on the basis of some similarity.23 Julian makes a point of noting the 
proliferation of these associations. The second revelation begins as an indeterminate 
showing, one "so lowe and so little and so simple" that Julian is not sure if it is a 
revelation at all (10.27). Yet as she beholds the sight, a comparison emerges: "It made 
me to thinke of the holy vernacle of Rome" (10.30-31). Julian's beholding of Christ's 
dripping blood is similarly associative. The moment is capacious: "[T]he bleding con-
tinued tille many thinges were sene and understonded" (7.14-15). Among the things 
seen and understood are the following three analogical associations: "Thes thre 
thinges cam to my minde in the time: pelettes, for the roundhede in the coming oute 
of the blode; the scale of herring, for the roundhede in the spreding; the droppes 
of the evesing of a house, for the plentuoushede unnumerable" (7.20-23). Elizabeth 
Robertson quotes this passage to argue that Julian's style is characterized by dilation 
(145-46). In this case, though, Julian specifies that the three images are not post 
factum rhetorical amplifications, but are generated "in the time" by the initial act of 

357
THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF ATTENTION IN JULIAN OF NORWICH'S A REVELATION OF LOVE
beholding. In both examples, Julian's particular locutions, if taken literally, imply a 
passivity on her part — the indistinct figure "made me to thinke" of the vernicle and 
the three images "came to my minde."24 If the analogical associations emerge spon-
taneously, Julian follows up by identifying the grounds upon which the comparisons 
rest. She holds together tenor and vehicle, as the associations disclose various profiles 
of an inexhaustible sight.25 
In the case of the lord and servant scene, many of the aspects of the revelation 
remain undisclosed for nearly twenty years. At which point, Julian hears the voice 
urging her to "take hede." She does:
I assented wilfully with gret desyer, seeing inwardly, with avisement, all the pointes and 
the propertes that were shewed in the same time, as ferforth as my wit and my under-
standing wolde serve: beginning my beholding at the lorde and at the servant; at the 
manner of sitting of the lorde and the place he sat on, and the coloure of his clothing and 
the manner of shape, and his chere withoute and his nobley and his goodnes within; at 
the manner of stonding of the servant, and the place, where and how; at his manner of 
clothing, the coloure and the shape; at his outwarde behaving; and at his inwarde goodnes 
and his unlothfulhede. (51.76-84)
She is recollecting in the primary sense of the word — gathering together the "pointes" 
and "propertes" of the scene in an attempt to identify their correct associations and 
see how they tie together. Her shifting of focus from point to point reflects how 
recollection proceeds "by processe" too. According to Augustine, the eye of the mind 
is not able to simultaneously hold (tenet) the entire contents of memory, so intentio 
directs the mind's eye toward the particular memory it wants dragged up from the 
mnemonic storehouse (De Trinitate 11.7.12). Julian does not retrieve her memory 
exactly as it was stored in May 1383; through the act of recollection, more of its 
"privites" are disclosed (51.62). Mary Carruthers' work on medieval mnemonic 
techniques helps us see more clearly how this aspect-change occurs in recollection. 
Carruthers points out how premodern thought divided memory images into two 
components: a likeness (similitude) and an inclination (intentio). Carruthers defines 
the latter as follows: "Latin intentio, derived from the verb intendo, refers to the 
attitudes, aims, and inclinations of the person remembering, as well as to the state of 
physical and mental concentration required" (15). Each likeness is colored with a 
specific mental tone that allows it to resonate with other memory images. When St. 
Bernard wrote about the necessity of receiving forgiveness for sins instead of obliter-
ating their memory, argues Carruthers, he was implying this two-stage understanding 
of memory: "what forgiveness changes is that intentio, the emotional direction (the 
root metaphor in converto) towards the memory images that still exist in one's mind" 
(97). When Julian recollects the lord and servant scene, the likeness remains the same. 
For instance, the color of the lord's dress is the same (blue), as is his placement 
(sitting on the earth). What has now changed is Julian's ability to understand the 
significance of these details; she is now attuned to the correct associations: the blue-
ness represents the lord's steadfastness and the sitting represents his position at the 

358
MICHAEL RABY
center of the human soul. Carruthers quotes the fifth-century bishop Peter Chrysolo-
gus describing the process of decoding the Gospel parables: "A potential spark is cold 
in the flint, and lies hidden in the steel, but it is brought into flame when the steel 
and flint are struck together. In similar manner, when an obscure word is brought 
together with meaning, it begins to glow" (45). Using Carruthers' framework, 
we can say that Julian has found the right "mental networks" to make the "misty" 
images glow with meaning (51.75). These mental networks were constructed by the 
repeated viewings of the vision as a whole, her subsequent inner learning and the (she 
hopes) divine "lighteninges and touchinges" that continue to illuminate the revela-
tions. Julian's new mental tone towards the lord and servant parable reverberates 
throughout the revelations as a whole, as it diminishes her haunting fear about the 
consequences of sin (53.7-8). 
Critics have pointed out the reciprocal structure of beholding in A Revelation: 
Julian beholds Christ and he beholds her (e.g., Gillespie 194). Despite the active 
connotations of the root word "hold," beholding also renders Julian passive. She is 
held by what she sees. Her refusal to look away from Christ on the crucifix culmi-
nates in the realization that she is bound to him: "For I wist wele that he that bounde 
me so sore, he shuld unbind me whan he wolde" (19.10-11). Christ guides the process 
of beholding, as well as beseeching. The tenth revelation begins with Christ beholding 
himself: "With a glad chere oure good lorde loked into his side and behelde, enjoy-
enge. And with his swete loking he led forth the understanding of his creature by the 
same wound into his sid, within" (24.1-3). Enticed by Christ's "swete loking," 
Julian's mental eye follows the direction of Christ's eyes into his wound. Their atten-
tion has been "oned," or, in the vocabulary of developmental psychology, joined.26 
Readers too are invited to join their attention with Julian's. Indeed, the work requires 
as much. As Derek Anderson observes, "Julian seeks to draw her reader into the 
'performance' of her showing by enacting the deflections of her own attention that 
occurred as she received the revelation and as she subsequently sought divine aid in 
understanding its meaning" (105). Where Julian looks, so do her readers. It is worth 
noting that A Revelation contains only one explicit imperative for the reader to 
"behold," a rhetorical device common in Nicholas Love and other devotional writers 
that places the narrator over and above the reader: "Beholde and see the vertu of this 
precious plenty of his dereworthy blode!" (12.17).27 Instead, Julian engages readers 
by aligning their sight with her own, and, in doing so, helps them to see as she 
saw. 
Julian prizes beholding as the fulfillment of beseeching, as the conversion of the 
"not yet" into the "now." Beholding unites temporally and perspectivally disparate 
phenomena in an "extended and dialectical present" (Ricoeur 11). This present is 
not static. Although Julian advises her readers to turn their intentio from seeking to 
beholding when granted a divine vision, she at the same time admits that beholding 
God invariably provokes further seeking: "And whan we see ought of him graciously, 
then are we stered by the same grace to seke with great desire to see him more blisse-
fully. And thus I saw him and sought him, and I had him and wanted him" (10.12-
14). The initial desire to see Christ turns into a desire to see more of him. As Turner 

359
THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF ATTENTION IN JULIAN OF NORWICH'S A REVELATION OF LOVE
puts it, "[w]here the contemplative religious characteristically thought of contempla-
tion principally in terms of rest as its goal, Julian is endlessly, if not at all goalessly, 
restless" (147). Julian cannot contain Christ in his entirety; her purse is not large 
enough. And though she may "have" him one moment, he will inevitably slip from 
her grasp. 
The limits of attention 
After Julian's first fifteen revelations subside, the bodily sickness that initiated them 
returns. She is visited by a "religious person" who inquires about her condition 
(66.12). Julian begins to recount the revelations, but she cuts herself off, feeling 
ashamed for her recklessness. The disavowal comes to weigh heavily on her: "But as 
a fole I let it passe from my minde" (66.22). She has failed to keep what was given to 
her. In the sixteenth revelation, she perceives an admonishment for this lapse, inter-
preting Christ's words as saying, "'For the sighte was passed fro the, thou lost it and 
couth or might not kepe it'" (70.15-16). Christ has preserved the entire sequence, 
though, refusing to "let it perish," and he graciously shows it again (70.12). How are 
we to account for Julian's faltering? What makes her mind's eye glance away at this 
critical moment?
The loss of the vision happens partly because Julian is not convinced at this point 
that the revelations are in fact sent by Christ. It is only upon re-viewing the entire 
sequence in the sixteenth revelation that she is confirmed in her faith. However, there 
is another factor at work as well. She was in pain: "I, for foly of feling of a litille 
bodely paine, so unwisely left for the time the comfort of alle this blessed shewing of 
oure lorde God" (66.23-25). Critics tend to overlook this explanation, preferring to 
see Julian's hesitation as the result of the difficulties involved in describing the revela-
tions in words or the product of a confrontation with the authority of a male priest 
(e.g., McAvoy, "For we be doubel" 174). While these are no doubt complicating 
factors in this highly suggestive episode, Julian is quite clear that she buckled because 
she was suffering "bodely paine." This confession is reiterated later when Julian 
describes how the devil tries to distract focus away from Christ by inciting pain: 
Than is it oure enmye that wille put us aback with his false drede of oure wrechednesse, 
for paine that he threteth us by. For it is his mening to make us so hevy and so sory in 
this that we shuld let out of minde the fair blisseful beholding of oure everlasting frende. 
(76.34-37, emphasis added)
The phrasing here recalls Julian's earlier self-recrimination ("I let it passe from my 
minde"). She has learned about the devil's threat of pain firsthand. A late medieval 
treatise on dying explains how those on their deathbed might be visited by the devil 
seeking to inflict pain in order to induce despair, and recommends focusing on Christ's 
pains on the cross as an antidote (Cohen 139-41).28 Throughout A Revelation, the 
devil attempts to distract Julian from beholding Christ. After the sixteenth revelation, 
for instance, Julian hears a cacophony of mocking voices that threaten to make her 

360
MICHAEL RABY
despair. In response, Julian refocuses her attention on the cross and shunts the 
voices to the periphery, ensuring that they remain little more than a garble of noise 
in the background.29 Her disavowal before the priest, though, suggests that she has 
not always been successful at resisting the devil's temptations.
In the chapter preceding Julian's disavowal, she describes how a person should 
respond to pain: "And therfore, though we ben in so much paine, wo, and disese that 
us thinkith we can thinke right nought but that we are in or that we feele, as soone 
as we may, passe we lightly over, and set we it at nought" (65.22-24). The capacity 
to pass over pain is a common feature in saints' lives. Indeed, this passage, and 
Julian's disavowal in the following chapter, take on additional resonance if we view 
them in light of the saint introduced near the beginning of Julian's short text — St. 
Cecilia. Julian claims that her desire for the triple wounds of contrition, compassion, 
and longing are inspired by hearing of St. Cecilia's devotion: "I harde a man telle of 
halye kyrke of the storye of Sainte Cecille, in the whilke shewinge I understode that 
she hadde thre woundes with a swerde in the nekke, with the whilke she pinede to 
the dede" (Vis. 1.36-38). Although the reference does not appear in the longer ver-
sion, I suspect Julian is thinking of Cecilia when she describes how the sight passed 
from her mind because she was in pain. According to Jacobus de Voragine's The 
Golden Legend, Cecilia was a noble Roman woman who converted many pagans to 
Christianity, including her betrothed husband (thus preserving her virginity) and a 
would-be executioner. The Roman authorities tried to boil her alive, but she survived 
unscathed; they then tried to slash her neck, but it took three attempts to finish the 
job, and, even then, she persevered for three days. For many late medieval readers, 
including Nicholas Love, she was a model of setting one's pains "at nought." 
In Love's Mirror of the Blessed Life of Jesus Christ, Cecilia keeps her attention so 
focused on an interior representation of the Passion that she becomes impervious to 
both physical torments and sensual pleasures, including the pomp of her wedding 
(12.5-11). Watson claims that Love's Cecilia exemplifies a trend in late medieval 
devotion that sought inner objects of concentration to block out the distractions of 
the external world ("Methods and Objectives" 137). 
But, for the unsanctified, ignoring bodily pain is not so easy. At the same time that 
Julian advises readers to set their pains "at nought," she points toward the riveting 
quality of extreme bodily pain: "though we ben in so much paine, wo, and disese that 
us thinkith we can thinke right nought but that we are in or that we feele." The body 
in this degree of pain can think of nothing other than its pain. Aquinas explains that 
the soul experiencing pain cannot learn anything new, since its intentio is entirely 
occupied: "physical pain, more than anything, absorbs the soul's energies [inten-
tionem animae]" (12e 37.1). And if the pain is especially acute, people will be unable 
to direct their attention to what they already know, let alone learn something new. 
Similarly, Augustine describes how severe bodily pain "blocks off the internal routes 
through which the soul's attention [intentio] was striving to reach out and sense 
things through the flesh" (De Genesi ad litteram 12.49; On the Literal Meaning of 
Genesis 12.49). The festering of attention results in a state of excessive imagining in 
which images pop up without significance. Julian's revelation of the lord and the 

361
THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF ATTENTION IN JULIAN OF NORWICH'S A REVELATION OF LOVE
servant exemplifies the contracting force of pain. She marvels at the servant's inabil-
ity to rise up, to project himself beyond the walls of the ditch, or turn his attention 
back towards the lord: "[H]e culde not turne his face to loke uppe on his loving lorde, 
which was to him full nere, in whom is full comfort. But as a man that was full febil 
and unwise for the time, he entended to his feling and enduring in wo" (51.16-18). 
Although dwelling on his pain is "unwise," Julian does not blame him. The servant's 
failure to pass over his pain anticipates her own yielding to "a litille bodely paine." 
It is important to point out that the experience of "bodely paine" is not inherently 
unwelcome. After all, Julian in her youth desired a sickness that would include "all 
manner of paines" (2.22). Esther Cohen explains how medieval religious texts tend to 
extol the utility of pain, often framing illness as a divine beneficence. According to 
Cohen, "[t]he idea that pain might distract people from concentrating upon salvation 
is extremely unusual" (11). One of the primary values of pain was its purgative effect; 
just as fire purifies gold, pain cleanses the body of sin. As Julian states: "For it pur-
geth and maketh us to know oureselfe and aske mercy" (27.24-25). The cultivation 
of compassion also requires experiencing some degree of pain. Julian's desire for a 
bodily sight of Christ's passion is largely motivated by a wish to share the suffering 
of Christ and those who witnessed his crucifixion (2.7-10). Julian participates in the 
trend of late medieval devotional practice that embraced pain for the sake of coming 
closer to Christ. The danger, though, is that pain will produce the contracting effect 
observed by Aquinas and Augustine, and the soul will shrink inside of itself, away 
from God, as the servant does. In Meditations on the Life of Christ, which Love 
translated into the Mirror, martyrs like St. Cecilia are reminded to contemplate 
Christ's suffering above their own at the risk of faltering under the pain and denying 
their faith (Magill 106-7). At one point in A Revelation of Love, Julian explains how 
her love for Christ is so much greater than her love for herself that the sorrow she 
feels while witnessing Christ's pain far exceeds her own excruciating pain (17.50-52). 
However, when the suffering Christ is dislodged from her mind's eye, her pain reas-
serts itself. Her sensitivity to the distracting force of pain is perhaps why, in the 
longer version, she removes the reference to the impassible St. Cecilia but retains the 
list of redeemed sinners, including Peter, who, not unlike Julian, denied Christ under 
the weight of the world.30 Christ does not punish Julian for her disavowal. He frames 
it not as willful disregard but as an overwhelming of her capacity: "For the sighte was 
passed fro the, thou lost it and couth or might not kepe it" (70.15-16). It is not that 
she would not keep the revelation; rather, she could not keep it. 
The distracting force of pain is not the only reason why Julian struggles to keep 
the revelations. They are marked by unpredictable and discontinuous turns that 
frustrate the gathering movement of attention. While beholding Christ's passion, she 
expects to see him die: "And I loked after the departing with alle my mightes and 
wende to have seen the body alle dead" (21.5-6). She is stretching forth in anticipa-
tion. But the moment of death is passed over. Instead, Christ is instantaneously 
reborn in delight: "[S]odenly, I beholding in the same crosse, he changed in blisseful 
chere" (21.8-9). Julian's "chere" changes in turn, as she is filled with a pervasive joy 

362
MICHAEL RABY
that recalls Mary Magdalene's joyful surprise at discovering the risen Christ at the 
tomb where she expected to find his dead body; in a like manner, Christ transforms 
himself and Julian in the "twinkling of an eye" (1 Cor. 15.52). His movements 
throughout A Revelation are characterized by suddenness: "his apering shalle be 
swithe sodeyn" (10.81). The discontinuous rhythm of the revelations sometimes leaves 
Julian behind. For instance, she would rather continue to behold Christ than attend 
to the thought that he brings to her mind about the inevitability of her sin: "God 
brought to my minde that I shuld sinne. And for liking that I had in beholding of 
him, I entended not redely to that shewing. And oure lorde fulle marcifully abode, 
and gave me grace for to entende" (37.1-3). Here it is "liking," not pain, that distracts 
Julian. She cleaves a little too closely to Christ. The Cloud of Unknowing warns its 
readers not to seize eagerly the spiritual nourishment offered by God: "And abide 
curtesly and meekly the wil of oure Lorde, and lache not over-hastely, as it were 
a gredy grehounde, hungre thee never so sore" (46.1631-33). Julian's decision to 
momentarily ignore Christ's will and remain focused on her "liking" represents a 
minor breach of courtesy. In a passage that echoes the Cloud, Julian explains how 
the desire to touch Christ should be tempered by courtesy:
Cleve we to him, and we shalle be seker and safe from alle manner of perilles. For 
our curtese lorde wille that we be as homely with him as hart may thinke or soule may 
desyer. But be we ware that we take not so rechelously this homelyhed for to leve curte-
sye. For our lorde himselfe is sovereyn homelyhed, and so homely as he is, as curtesse he 
is. For he is very curteyse. (77.41-45)
Christ demonstrates his courtesy when he suspends his teaching and waits for Julian 
to catch up. A Revelation of Love makes clear that the divine can neither be entirely 
anticipated nor entirely constrained.
Julian's echoing imperative to attend is complemented by an awareness of the 
limitations of attention. As humans we cannot achieve the perpetual vigilance of 
Christ, who, writes Julian, "taketh heed to nobille thinges and to gret, but also to 
litille and to small, to lowe and to simple, and to one and to other" (32.4-5). Julian 
reciprocates Christ's attentiveness by attending to what he gives her, including seem-
ingly insignificant or obscure details. She looks ahead to what can never be antici-
pated, and when it arrives she beholds with the utmost diligence. Her readers are 
encouraged to reciprocate in turn. Her text demands the careful, patient response that 
she herself models, a way of receiving and keeping its meanings without holding them 
too tightly, so as to provide space for the text to continue unfolding and deepening.
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Suzanne Akbari, Alexandra Gillespie, Mari Ruti, David 
Townsend, and Max Woolaver for their helpful comments at various stages in the 
development of this essay. I would also like to acknowledge the useful suggestions of 
the reviewers.

363
THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF ATTENTION IN JULIAN OF NORWICH'S A REVELATION OF LOVE
Notes
1 References are to chapter and line number(s) of the 
long text (A Revelation) in The Writings of Julian 
Norwich: "A Vision Showed to a Devout Woman" 
and "A Revelation of Love," ed. Nicholas Watson 
and Jacqueline Jenkins. 
2 For an overview of the role played by attention 
in the religious, ethical, and political spheres in 
the Middle Ages, see von Moos. Also useful is 
McMahon. 
3 Surprisingly, no monograph-length study addresses 
Augustine and attention. Relevant articles include 
Brittain; Brown; and Caston. Also helpful are 
discussions in Stock and O'Daly.
4 North continues: "What's more, and more unset-
tling, to a clear division between religious and 
nonreligious spheres, a secular notion of distraction-
dispersal cannot remain deaf to the Christian spirit 
in which saeculum itself is said. A diversion from 
the way and the truth is already at work in the 
concept of secularity. 'Secular distraction' is, in 
other words, a pleonasm" (55).
5 Marion draws a distinction between the possibility 
of revelation — revelation with a small "r" — and 
the historical event of Christian Revelation. The 
former is an acceptable field of inquiry for phenom-
enology, while the latter belongs strictly to the 
realm of theology (Being Given 5).
6 For the medievalism of the early work of Heidegger, 
and its significance to medieval studies in particular, 
see Knapp.
7 Describing formal indication, Heidegger writes: 
"I must see away from the what-content and attend 
only to the fact that the object is a given, attitudi-
nally grasped one" (Phenomenology of Religious 
Life 40). Heidegger criticizes Husserl's phenomenol-
ogy for focusing on the "what-content" to the exclu-
sion of the thatness of beings, that is, their existence; 
instead, argues Heidegger, the intentional object 
should be "interrogated regarding its manner of 
being" (History of the Concept of Time 110). For 
the medieval theologian, the realization that God 
exists outweighs predicative statements about what 
God is. See Myles 61-65.
8 In an often-quoted passage, Brentano writes: "Every 
mental phenomenon is characterized by what the 
scholastics of the Middle Ages called the intentional 
(or mental) inexistence of an object, what we might 
call, though not wholly unambiguously, reference to 
a content, direction upon an object (which is not to 
be understood here as meaning a thing), or imma-
nent objectivity" (68). On premodern concepts of 
intentionality and their relation to phenomenology, 
see Myles 33-53.
9 In a footnote to Ideas I, Husserl claims that "not 
even the essential connection between attention and 
intentionality — this fundamental fact: that atten-
tion of every sort is nothing else than a fundamental 
species of intentive modifications — has ever, to 
my knowledge, been emphasized before" (§92n32). 
P. Sven Arvidson argues that Husserl's work does 
not clearly distinguish attention and intentionality 
(130).
10 According to the Oxford English Dictionary, Chau-
cer is the first to use the English word "attention" 
(s. v. "attention"). It appears in his translation of 
Boethius's Consolation of Philosophy: "Aftir this 
sche stynte a lytel; and after that sche hadde 
ygadrede by atempre stillenesse myn attencioun, she 
seyde thus" (2.pr1.1-3).
11 See, for instance, Baker, Julian of Norwich's 
Showings; Jantzen; and Watson, "Composition."
12 For a phenomenologically nuanced reading of the 
thirteenth-century Beguine Hadewijch, see Rozenski. 
13 On the dating of the two versions, see Watson, 
"Composition." Markers of dates and times are 
important for Julian. Watson observes how "[t]he 
passing of time is not an incidental feature of 
[A Revelation]; on the contrary, dates, numbers of 
years, Julian's own age, are carefully brought before 
us at the work's most crucial moments, as though 
they are of thematic significance" ("Trinitarian 
Hermeneutic" 83).
14 As Denys Turner observes: "If the same word 'see' 
can do the epistemological work necessary for any-
thing from the visual immediacy of the sight of a 
hazelnut to what comes to her by way of the mean-
ings which that sight discloses after a minimum of 
twenty years of reflection on it, then the elasticity of 
the word has been made to extend, in practice, 
across a vast semantic range, heedless of any distinc-
tions we might think fit to make between experience 
and its meaning, or between the immediacy of the 
visual and its theological mediation" (79).
15 As Watson puts it, "no other visionary material . . . 
combines 'bodily' and 'ghostly' sight with any of the 
almost polyphonic complexity of Julian's revelation 
(it is more common for them to be contrasted . . . 
than to occur together in an integrated act of divine 
communication)" ("Trinitarian Hermeneutic" 86).
16 The terms "suppul" and "buxom" also appear in the 
work of Richard Rolle. In one of the "Meditations 
on the Passion" ascribed to Rolle, the speaker 
expresses a desire for his hardened heart to be made 
"souple" by a drop of Christ's blood (249). On 
Julian's relation to Hilton and Rolle and the other 
so-called "Middle English mystics," see Baker, 
"Varieties of Middle English Mystical Discourse."
17 Given the uncertainty surrounding her identity and 
her reticence regarding sources, it is difficult to 

364
MICHAEL RABY
gauge the level of Julian's familiarity with Augus-
tine's works. Critics have argued that she knew 
Confessions and De Trinitate, but whether directly 
or indirectly remains an open question. On this 
matter, I share Jeanette S. Zissel's view: "Julian's 
ideas may indeed be innovative, but in their innova-
tion they do not completely reject Augustine or the 
Augustinian tradition, but instead adapt his ideas to 
new purposes" (335-36).
18 See also Augustine's discussion of this passage in 
Confessions, 11.29.39.
19 On this point, and the subsequent quotation, I am 
indebted to Karma Lochrie's discussion of divine 
speech (72).
20 For example, Julian describes the contemplation of 
other's sins as "beholding": "For the beholding of 
other mennes sinne, it maketh as it were a thick mist 
afore the eye of the soule, and we may not for the 
time se the fairhede of God, but if we may beholde 
them with contrition with him, with compassion on 
him, and with holy desyer to God for him. For with-
out this it noyeth and tempesteth and letteth the 
soule that beholde them" (76.12-16). The fact that 
Julian finds it necessary to specify what kind of 
beholding is appropriate here — beholding "with 
compassion" as opposed to simply "beholding" — 
casts doubt on McNamer's claim that "beholding" 
always implies a sense of empathetic attachment.
21 Paul Ricoeur points out the paradoxical conse-
quences of Augustine's theory of time. Arguing that 
Augustine replaces the notion of a cosmological, 
point-like present with an "extended and dialectical 
present," Ricoeur shows how intentio invariably 
results in distentio. For instance, when Augustine 
attends to the recitation of a psalm, his attention 
is divided (distenditur) between memory and 
expectation, as it looks back at what it has 
recited and looks ahead at the words still to come 
(Conf. 11.28.38). As Ricoeur puts it, "the more 
the mind makes itself intentio, the more it suffers 
distentio" (21).
22 Originally meaning to grasp with one's hands 
and by extension with one's attention, Old English 
cepan was pressed into service as a translation for 
Latin observare sometime around 1000 (OED, s.v. 
"keep," v.).
23 Husserl describes the process of "associative awak-
ening" as follows: "From what is given intuitively 
(perception or memory) emanates an intention, an 
intentional tendency, in which, gradually and unin-
terruptedly, what is submerged and no longer living 
seems to steadily change over to the vivid and ever 
more vivid, until, at a tempo now more deliberate, 
now more rapid, what has receded appears again 
as intuition" (Experience and Judgment 178). The 
mind's capacity to form associations played an 
important role in medieval reading practices, such 
as lectio divina. On Julian and lectio divina, see 
Davies; and Gillespie and Ross. 
24 Watson questions whether we should read phrases 
such as these literally ("Trinitarian Hermeneutic" 
80-81). My own sense is that the consistency and 
coherence of expressions that signify receptivity 
suggest that they have been chosen in accordance 
with Julian's characteristic linguistic precision and 
are not merely idiomatic. 
25 Focusing on Julian's engagement with medieval 
forms of exegesis, Michelle Karnes argues that 
Julian's interpretive method is characterized by the 
linking of dissimilar, but compatible, images. 
26 "Joint attention" refers to a child's ability to follow 
the direction of another person's attention (e.g., a 
parent's gaze). Typically developed between the 
ages of nine and eighteen months, the capacity for 
joint attention is one of the developmental mile-
stones that Augustine describes in his account of 
his childhood in Confessions (Stock 25). On joint 
attention generally, see Tomasello.
27 Baker considers the ways in which Julian's text dif-
fers from Love's and other handbooks of devotion, 
but she does not take into account techniques of 
focalization (Julian of Norwich's Showings 40-62).
28 Cohen glosses the relevant passage: "On a difficult 
and hazardous journey, the almost inevitable pain 
of dying was a dangerous distraction that might 
cause the traveler to lose his footing and tumble into 
the abyss of hell" (141). 
29 In Christian thought, the devil is closely associated 
with the threat of distraction. A particularly vivid 
medieval example comes from the biography of 
Christina of Markyate, a twelfth-century anchoress. 
While she reads her Psalter, a gang of toads invades 
her cell to divert her attention: "Their sudden 
appearance, with their big and terrible eyes, was 
most frightening, for they squatted here and there, 
arrogating the middle of the Psalter which lay open 
on her lap at all hours of the day for her use. But 
when she refused to move and would not give up 
her singing of the psalms, they went away, which 
makes one think that they were devils" (qtd. in 
Camille 72-73). 
30 The absence of St. Cecilia from the long text has 
proven a popular topic of speculation. Hagen argues 
that Julian's long text evinces a more mature, 
self-confident voice that does not need to define 
itself vis-à-vis an exemplar like Cecilia. Similarly, 
McAvoy sees Julian as repudiating the "paternal 
language" of hagiography to ground the text in the 
experience of her own body ("For we be double" 
171). My explanation has the advantage of account-
ing for pedagogical motivation: Julian may well 
want to convince her "evenchristen" that pain is not 
as easily overcome as saints' lives would have us 
believe.

365
THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF ATTENTION IN JULIAN OF NORWICH'S A REVELATION OF LOVE
Works cited
Anderson, Derek N. "Julian of Norwich's Non-Violent Account of Salvation." Diss. Loyola U, 2005. 
Aquinas, Thomas. Summa Theologiae. 60 vols. Ed. T. Gilby and T. C. O'Brien. New York: McGraw Hill, 
1964-74.
Arendt, Hannah. The Life of the Mind. Ed. Mary McCarthy. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1978.
Arvidson, P. Sven. The Sphere of Attention: Context and Margin. Dordrecht: Springer, 2006. 
Augustine. Confessions. Ed. James J. O'Donnell. Oxford: Oxford UP, 1992.
——. De Genesi ad litteram. Ed. J. P. Migne. Patrologia Latina 34. 
——. De Trinitate. Ed. J. P. Migne. Patrologia Latina 42.
——. The Literal Meaning of Genesis. On Genesis: A Refutation of the Manichees; Unfinished Literal Commen-
tary on Genesis; The Literal Meaning of Genesis. Ed. John Rotelle. Trans. Edmund Hill. Hyde Park: New City, 
2002. 153-506.
——. Homilies on the First Epistle of John. Ed. Daniel E. Doyle and Thomas Martin. Trans. Boniface Ramsey. 
Hyde Park: New City, 2008.
——. Tractatus in Epistolam Joannis ad Parthos. Ed. J. P. Migne. Patrologia Latina 35. 
Baker, Denise N. Julian of Norwich's Showings: From Vision to Book. Princeton: Princeton UP, 1994. 
——. "Julian of Norwich and the Varieties of Middle English Mystical Discourse." McAvoy 53-63. 
Benjamin, Walter. "The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction." Illuminations. Ed. and intro. 
Hannah Arendt. Trans. Harry Zohn. New York: Schocken, 1969. 217-51. 
Brentano, Franz. Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint. Ed. Oskar Kraus and Linda L. McAlister. Trans. 
Antos C. Rancurello, D. B. Terrell, and Linda L. McAlister. London: Routledge, 1995.
Brittain, Charles. "Attention Deficit in Plotinus and Augustine: Psychological Problems in Christian and Platonist 
Theories of the Grades of Virtue." Proceedings of the Boston Area Colloquium in Ancient Philosophy. Vol. 18. 
Ed. John J. Clearly and Gary M. Gurtler. Leiden: Brill, 2003. 223-63. 
Brown, Deborah. "Augustine and Descartes on the Function of Attention in Perceptual Awareness." Conscious-
ness: From Perception to Reflection in the History of Philosophy. Ed. Sara Heinämaa, et al. Dordrecht: 
Springer, 2007. 153-73. 
Camille, Michael. Image on the Edge: The Margins of Medieval Art. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard UP, 1992. 
Carruthers, Mary. The Craft of Thought: Meditation, Rhetoric, and the Making of Images, 400-1200. Cambridge: 
Cambridge UP, 1998.
Casey, Edward S. "Memory and Phenomenological Method." Phenomenology in Practice and Theory. Ed. 
William S. Hamrick. Dordrecht: Martin Nijhoff, 1985. 35-52.
Caston, Victor. "Connecting Traditions: Augustine and the Greeks on Intentionality." Ancient and Medieval 
Theories of Intentionality. Ed. Dominik Perler. Leiden: Brill, 2001. 23-48. 
Chaucer, Geoffrey. The Riverside Chaucer. 3rd ed. Ed. Larry D. Benson. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1987.
The Cloud of Unknowing. Ed. Patrick J. Gallacher. Kalamazoo: Medieval Institute Publications, 1997. 
Cohen, Esther. The Modulated Scream: Pain in Late Medieval Culture. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 2010.
Crary, Jonathan. Suspensions of Perception: Attention, Spectacle, and Modern Culture. 1999. Cambridge, Mass.: 
MIT Press, 2001.
Davies, Oliver. "Transformational Processes in the Work of Julian of Norwich and Mechthild of Magdeburg." 
Glasscoe 39-52.
Gillespie, Vincent. "'[S]he do the police in different voices': Pastiche, Ventriloquism, and Parody in Julian of 
Norwich." McAvoy 192-207.
Gillespie, Vincent and Maggie Ross. "The Apophatic Image: The Poetics of Effacement in Julian of Norwich." 
Glasscoe 53-77.
Glasscoe, Marion, ed. The Medieval Mystical Tradition in England: Exeter Symposium V: Papers Read at 
Dartington Hall, July 1992. Cambridge: Brewer, 1992.
Hagen, Susan K. "St. Cecilia and St. John of Beverly: Julian of Norwich's Early Model and Late Affirmation." 
Julian of Norwich: A Book of Essays. Ed. Sandra McEntire. New York: Garland, 1998. 91-114.
Heidegger, Martin. Gesamtausgabe, vol. 60: Phänomenologie des religiösen Lebens. Ed. Claudius Strube. 
Frankfurt am Main Klostermann, 1995.
——. History of the Concept of Time: Prolegomena. Trans. Theodore Kisiel. Bloomington: Indiana UP, 1985.

366
MICHAEL RABY
——. The Phenomenology of Religious Life. Trans. Matthias Fritsch and Jennifer Anna Gosetti-Ferencei. 
Bloomington: Indiana UP, 2010.
Hilton, Walter. The Mixed Life. Ed. S. J. Ogilvie-Thomson. Salzburg: Institut für Anglistik und Amerikanistik, 
1986. 
——. The Scale of Perfection. Ed. Thomas H. Bestul. Kalamazoo: Medieval Institute Publications, 2000.
Husserl, Edmund. Experience and Judgment. Trans. James S. Churchill and Karl Ameriks. Evanston, IL: North-
western UP, 1997.
——. Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy; First Book: General 
Introduction to a Pure Phenomenology. Trans. F. Kersten. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1982. 
Jacobus de Voragine. The Golden Legend: Readings on the Saints. Trans. William Granger Ryan. Princeton: 
Princeton UP, 2012.
Jantzen, Grace. Julian of Norwich. New ed. Mahwah: Paulist, 2000.
Julian of Norwich. The Writings of Julian Norwich: "A Vision Showed to a Devout Woman" and "A Revelation 
of Love." Ed. Nicholas Watson and Jacqueline Jenkins. University Park: Pennsylvania State UP, 2006.
Karnes, Michelle. "Julian of Norwich's Art of Interpretation." Journal of Medieval and Early Modern Studies 
42.2 (2012): 333-63.
Knapp, Ethan. "Medieval Studies, Historicity, and Heidegger's Early Phenomenology." The Legitimacy of the 
Middle Ages: On the Unwritten History of Theory. Ed. Andrew Cole and D. Vance Smith. Durham: Duke UP, 
2010. 159-93.
Knuuttila, Simo. "The Emergence of the Logic of Will in Medieval Thought." The Augustinian Tradition. Ed. 
Gareth B. Matthews. Berkeley: U of California P, 1999. 206-21.
Lochrie, Karma. Margery Kempe and Translations of the Flesh. Philadelphia: U of Pennsylvania P, 1991.
Love, Nicholas. The Mirror of the Blessed Life of Jesus Christ: A Reading Text. Ed. Michael G. Sargent. Exeter: 
U of Exeter P, 2004. 
Magill, Kevin J. Julian of Norwich: Mystic or Visionary? New York: Routledge, 2006.
Marion, Jean-Luc. Being Given: Toward a Phenomenology of Givenness. Trans. Jeffrey L. Kosky. Stanford: 
Stanford UP, 2002.
——. Cartesian Questions: Method and Metaphysics. Trans. Jeffrey L. Kosky, John Cottingham, and Stephen 
Voss. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1999.
——. In Excess: Studies of Saturated Phenomena. Trans. Vincent Berraud. New York: Fordham UP, 2002. 
McAvoy, Liz Herbert, ed. A Companion to Julian of Norwich. Cambridge: Brewer, 2008.
——. "'For we be doubel of God's making': Writing, Gender, and the Body in Julian of Norwich." McAvoy 
166-80.
McGrath, S. J. The Early Heidegger and Medieval Philosophy: Phenomenology of the Godforsaken. Washington, 
D.C.: Catholic U of America P, 2006.
McMahon, Ciarán. "The Prehistory of the Concept of 'Attention.'" Diss. U College Dublin, 2007. 
McNamer, Sarah. Affective Meditation and the Invention of Medieval Compassion. Philadelphia: U of 
Pennsylvania P, 2010.
Myles, Robert. Chaucerian Realism. Woodbridge: Brewer, 1994.
Newman, Barbara. "What Did It Mean to Say 'I Saw'? The Clash between Theory and Practice in Medieval 
Visionary Culture." Speculum 80 (2005): 1-43.
North, Paul. The Problem of Distraction. Stanford: Stanford UP, 2012.
O'Daly, Gerard. Augustine's Philosophy of Mind. Berkeley: U of California P, 1987.
Patrologia cursus completus, series Latina. Ed. J.-P. Migne. 221 vols. Paris, 1844-64. 
A Pistle of Discrecioun of Stirings. Deonise Hid Divinite and Other Treatises on Contemplative Prayer Related 
to The Cloud of Unknowing. Ed. Phyllis Hodgson. EETS 231. 1955. London: Oxford UP, 1958. 62-77.
Ricoeur, Paul. Time and Narrative. Vol. 1. Trans. Kathleen McLaughlin and David Pellauer. Chicago: U of 
Chicago P, 1984.
Robertson, Elizabeth. "Julian of Norwich's 'Modernist' Style and the Creation of Audience." McAvoy 139-53.
Rolle, Richard. "Meditations on the Passion: Text I." English Writings of Richard Rolle: Hermit of Hampole. Ed. 
Hope Emily Allen. 1931. Oxford: Clarendon, 1963.
Rozenski, Steven, Jr. "The Promise of Eternity: Love and Poetic Form in Hadewijch's Liederen or Stanzaic 
Poems." Exemplaria 22.4 (2010): 305-25.

367
THE PHENOMENOLOGY OF ATTENTION IN JULIAN OF NORWICH'S A REVELATION OF LOVE
Staley, Lynn. "Julian of Norwich and the Late Fourteenth-Century Crisis of Authority." The Powers of the Holy: 
Religion, Politics, and Gender in Late Medieval English Culture. Ed. David Aers and Lynn Staley. University 
Park: Pennsylvania State UP, 1996. 107-78.
Steinbock, Anthony J. "Affection and Attention: On the Phenomenology of Becoming Aware." Continental 
Philosophy Review 37 (2004): 21-43.
Stock, Brian. Augustine the Reader: Meditation, Self-Knowledge, and the Ethics of Interpretation. Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard UP, 1996.
TeSelle, Eugene. "Exploring the Inner Conflict: Augustine's Sermons on Romans 7 and 8." Augustine: Biblical 
Exegete. Ed. Frederick Van Fleteren and Joseph C. Schnaubelt. New York: Peter Lang, 2004. 313-46.
Tomasello, Michael. The Cultural Origins of Human Cognition. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard UP, 1999.
A Tretis of Discrescyon of Spirites. Deonise Hid Divinite and Other Treatises on Contemplative Prayer Related 
to The Cloud of Unknowing. Ed. Phyllis Hodgson. EETS 231. 1955. London: Oxford UP, 1958. 80-93.
Turner, Denys. Julian of Norwich, Theologian. New Haven: Yale UP, 2011.
Von Moos, Peter. "Attentio est quaedam sollicitudo. Die religiöse, ethische und politische Dimension der Aufmerk-
samkeit im Mittelalter." Aufermerksamkeiten: Archäologie der literarischen Kommunikation VII. Ed. Aleida 
Assmann and Jan Assmann. Munich: Fink Verlag, 2001. 91-127. 
Watson, Nicholas. "The Composition of Julian of Norwich's Revelation of Love." Speculum 68 (1993): 637-83.
——. "The Methods and Objectives of Thirteenth-Century Anchoritic Devotion." The Medieval Mystical Tradi-
tion in England: Papers Read at Dartington Hall, July, 1987. Ed. Marion Glasscoe. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 
1987. 132-54.
——. "The Trinitarian Hermeneutic in Julian of Norwich's Revelation of Love." Glasscoe 79-100.
Zissel, Jeanette S. "Universal Salvation in the Earthly City: De Civitate Dei and the Significance of the Hazelnut 
in Julian of Norwich's Shewings." Urban Space in the Middle Ages and the Early Modern Age. Ed. Albrecht 
Classen. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 2009. 331-52.
Notes on contributor
Michael Raby is a PhD candidate in the English Department at the University of 
Toronto. His dissertation explores the interplay of attention and distraction in late 
medieval culture. 
Correspondence to: Michael Raby. Email: m.raby@mail.utoronto.ca

