Journal of Trust Research
ISSN: 2151-5581 (Print) 2151-559X (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rjtr20
Calculativeness and trust: A view from
phenomenology
Morten Frederiksen
To cite this article: Morten Frederiksen (2014) Calculativeness and trust: A view from
phenomenology, Journal of Trust Research, 4:1, 34-43, DOI: 10.1080/21515581.2014.891319
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/21515581.2014.891319
Published online: 18 Mar 2014.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 629
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjtr20

Calculativeness and trust: A view from phenomenology
Morten Frederiksen*
Department of Political Science, Aalborg University, Copenhagen, Denmark
(Received 31 December 2012; final version received 18 December 2013)
Oliver Williamson's characterisation of calculativeness as inimical to trust (Williamson,
O. E. [1993]. Calculativeness, trust, and economic organization. The Journal of Law
and Economics, 36, 453-486) contradicts most sociological trust research. However, a
similar argument is found within trust phenomenology. This paper reinvestigates
Williamson's argument from the perspective of Løgstrup's phenomenological theory of
trust. Contrary to Williamson, however, Løgstrup's contention is that trust, not
calculativeness, is the default attitude and only when suspicion is awoken does trust
falter. This paper argues that while Williamson's distinction between calculativeness and
trust is supported by phenomenology, the analysis needs to take actual subjective
experience into consideration. It points out that, first, Løgstrup places trust alongside
calculativeness as a different mode of engaging in social interaction, rather conceiving
of trust as a state or the outcome of a decision-making process. Second, the analysis
must take into consideration that people often engage in interaction on the basis of
familiarity rather than calculation. Finally, the institutionally multilayered character of
social interaction means that trust and calculativeness cannot a priori be separated into
non-market and market relations. Rather, it is reasonable to expect that both trust and
calculativeness may exist within both market and non-market relations.
Keywords: trust; calculativeness; phenomenology; familiarity; Løgstrup; institutions
Introduction
The relationship between trust and rationality is a much-contested issue in sociological
trust research. It has been dealt with by researchers subscribing to functionalism,
interactionism, structuralism, neo-institutionalism, rational action theory and social
constructionism. However, the phenomenological tradition within sociology and the
social sciences has paid limited attention to this issue. This paper contributes to a further
development of the phenomenology of trust by re-examining Oliver Williamson's (1993)
analysis of trust and calculativeness from the perspective of the philosopher Knud Ejler
Løgstrup (1905-1981). Løgstrup's overlooked phenomenology defines trust as a
fundamental category of social being and realigns trusting and calculating as different
modes of engaging in social interaction, rather than as different levels of reflexivity.
Thus, Løgstrup's reconfiguration of the trust concept challenges both transaction cost
economics and contemporary phenomenology.
The concept of calculativeness is different from the concept of rational action applied
in most sociological investigations of trust. Authors such as Coleman (1990), Elster
(2007) and Gambetta (1988) employ rational choice analysis as an analytical heuristic
*Email: mfr@dps.aau.dk
Journal of Trust Research, 2014
Vol. 4, No. 1, 34-43, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/21515581.2014.891319
© 2014 Peter Ping Li

suited for the description, modelling and possibly prediction of human action. Employing
the concept of calculativeness, however, Williamson commits himself to a description
of individual experience rather than to an analytical heuristic (see also Karpik
2014). Consequently, a conversation is possible between Williamson's analysis and
phenomenology.
In this paper, Løgstrup's (1997) phenomenological philosophy of trust is employed in
a reinvestigation of Williamson's argument. Løgstrup's analysis contributes to William-
son's argument by (1) realigning calculativeness and trust as two different processes
rather than process and outcome, respectively; (2) investigating how familiarity underpins
social interaction outside calculativeness; and (3) examining how institutional settings
underpin familiarity and trust in different settings, including markets. Furthermore,
Løgstrup contributes to the conversation within phenomenology on trust by arguing that
even though trust is linked to familiarity, it is not familiarity itself.
In this paper, Williamson's discussion of trust and calculativeness is first reviewed.
Secondly, Løgstrup's analysis of trust is presented and situated within the wider field of
phenomenology. Thirdly, the differences between knowledge-based calculativeness and
familiarity-based trust are explored. Fourthly, the impact of institutional contexts on trust
and calculativeness is analysed. Finally, the entire argument is summarised and some
implications for trust research are outlined.
Williamson's concept of trust
Williamson argues that trust is not a specific level of perceived risk but rather a state in
which risk and calculativeness are almost absent. This argument contradicts most other
authors working with trust as a rational action such as Coleman (1990), Elster (2007) and
Gambetta (1988). Outside the rational action paradigm his argument also contradicts some
of the most prominent sociological theories on trust. Sztompka (1999) and Offe (1999)
characterise interpersonal trust as making a type of bet and Giddens (1990) and Luhmann
(1979) both stress that interpersonal trust relies on a process of signalling and analysis.
By contrast, Williamson argues that societal institutions, transaction governance and
temporal characteristics of the relationship can account for a calculative reason for most
decisions otherwise characterised as trust. Accordingly, trust becomes a superfluous
notion if used synonymously with risk and chance-taking. He asserts that we should
instead reserve the notion of trust for those few instances where calculativeness is absent
or minimal.
Williamson's argument runs counter to most trust research delivering a somewhat
restricted, residual notion of trust. However, Løgstrup's phenomenology of trust is more
in line with Williamson's argument.
Løgstrup's phenomenology of trust
The Danish philosopher and theologian K. E. Løgstrup (1997) developed a phenomeno-
logy of trust which has distinct similarities to Williamson's separation of trust from
calculativeness. Løgstrup studied with Heidegger, Bergson, Merleau-Ponty and Lipps and
drew inspiration from Kirkegaard, Husserl and Scheler in his work, elaborating on
Heidegger's notion of Being-in-the-world. To Heidegger (1962), this describes the way
human Being (Dasein) is always in an internal, involved relation to the world - a non-
Cartesian, mutually constitutive relationship between humans and the worlds to which
they belong.
Journal of Trust Research
35

To Løgstrup, two categories of Being-in-the-world are particularly important: the
Sovereign expressions of life and the Obsessive. These characterise different ways of
perceiving, experiencing and making sense of the world that are fundamental to human
existence as social beings. The obsessive, such as jealousy and distrust, are self-enclosed
and self-sustaining states casting doubt on every action of the other based on interpreted
affronts or deceptions. In contrast, a sovereign expression such as trust, sincerity or mercy
'draws content from the specific situation and the relation to the other, which is to say,
from my conception of that situation and relation, of their actual circumstances and
history' (Løgstrup, 2007, p. 52f). In the obsessive, action is reactive and driven by
contingencies, whereas in the sovereign the situation emerges from the way activity and
interactions unfold as a process of trust. Trust is, consequently, fundamental to the way
people become absorbed in the situation at hand - what Gurwitsch calls the Millieu
(Vaitkus, 1991). In more familiar terms, this means that life is a fundamentally social
phenomenon which is already and always under way and in process. Process is, however,
already inscribed with basic modes of social relations - the sovereign expressions - of
which trust is one (Løgstrup, 1997). In contrast, the obsessive is the distanced Cartesian
reflection on the disparate objects of the situation (Fink & MacIntyre, 1997). The process
character of Løgstrup's conceptualisation of trust is in many ways similar to the process
focus emerging within trust research (see Möllering, 2013).
Løgstrup's distinction between the sovereign and the obsessive parallels Williamson's
distinction between trust and calculativeness. However, before engaging Williamson, two
more issues must be addressed. First, it is necessary to clarify what trust does according
to Løgstrup. Second, Løgstrup's phenomenology of trust must be reconnected with
contemporary, phenomenological research on trust.
Defining life as a fundamentally social or joint endeavour, it is inescapable that we
depend on each other and that life, if some level of trust were not present, 'would be
impaired and wither away' (Løgstrup, 2007, p. 8). Trust, to Løgstrup, refers to self-
surrender - laying oneself open - to the other in interaction. However, it is only when
interaction flows as a process that trust emerges as a 'spontaneous other-regarding
impulse or mode of conduct' (Niekerk, 2007, p. xiv). If however for some reason one
suspects ill-intentions or the self-exposure is unrequited, it becomes necessary to guard
oneself - to cover the exposure. The notion of trust as accepting vulnerability
(Misztal, 2011) is recast by Løgstrup as surrendering to and being drawn into the
inherent vulnerability of intersubjectivity [see also James' (2014) argument about
uncertainty and vulnerability]. However, this openness may be unsettled if something
untoward or disruptive emerges occasioning a shift out of trust and even into the
obsessive.
Løgstrup's analysis departs from other phenomenological research on trust in some
important regards. First, most researchers (Brown, 2009; Möllering, 2006; Vaitkus, 1990;
Zucker, 1986) build their analysis on Schütz and consequently on Husserl. These theories
focus on subjective experience and interpretations, seeing trust as an expectation based on
an assumption of overlapping life-worlds. While there is much in common here, Løgstrup's
point of departure is the situation rather than the subject. He perceives trust as a spontaneity
unleashed in interaction rather than the subjective deployment of intersubjectively
established typification. Trusting is conceptualised as ongoing rather than as an outcome
of interpretation. As a consequence, trust cannot be adequately characterised as expectation
(Möllering, 2001; Zucker, 1986) but rather as an inscribed potential in practice or activity.
Second, Løgstrup conceives of trust only as in an Other because openness - in contrast to
vulnerability - is directed at another. This distinction is helpful in investigating the
36
M. Frederiksen

relationship between trusting the other as an Other, and dealing with the other in terms of
institutionalised roles and rules. Empirically, this distinction is apparent in Brown's (2009)
and Cox's (2012) studies. Finally, Løgstrup subscribes to notions of familiarity different
from those of social phenomenology (Schütz, 1967). He does not link trust to taken-for-
grantedness (Möllering, 2006), accepting the rules of play (Garfinkel, 1963) or a pre-
reflexive application of experience-based schemata (Vaitkus, 1990). Rather, to Løgstrup
trust is more akin to Gurwitch's notion of fusion within the context of the Milieu-World in
which people submit themselves to and are seized by the unity of the encounter (Vaitkus,
1991, p. 52). While this type of consciousness is different from the reflexivity of
calculativeness and the obsessive, it is by no means less conscious. The spontaneity of
trusting constitutes a source of potentiality and creativity which greatly expands the
situation, rather than limiting it to 'and-so-forth' types of assumptions. From this outline of
Løgstrup's position and analysis, we may now turn to the question of calculability.
Trust and calculability
In Løgstrup's terms, we can interpret the shift between trust and calculativeness as a shift
between the sovereign and the obsessive. Løgstrup writes of the phenomenological shift
from trust to calculativeness:
The basic character of trust is revealed in yet another way. In love and sympathy there is no
impulse to investigate the other person's character. [...] Of ourselves we make no conscious
effort, for the simple reason that there has been nothing about the other to raise our suspicion.
If, on the other hand, we are not in sympathy with the other person, or if there is a certain
tension between us and the other because of something about the other regarding which we
are uncertain or against which we react with irritation, dissatisfaction, or antipathy, then we
begin to form a picture of the other's character. We then begin to see in him or her a variety
of dispositions because we are on our guard. (Løgstrup, 1997, p. 13)
We trust unless suspicion prompts us to consider risk, according to Løgstrup. William-
son's statement that calculativeness is inimical to trust is essentially the same observation:
trust is a way of perceiving and relating to the other different from calculativeness and the
two can rarely coexist.
Nonetheless, Williamson and Løgstrup fundamentally disagree about the character of
trust. Løgstrup considers trust a universal default which only shifts to calculativeness
when suspicion is aroused. Williamson, in contrast, argues that calculativeness is the
universal default limited only by the calculated decision to cease calculation. Williamson
considers trust to be a state and calculativeness a process, while Løgstrup considers both
calculativeness and trust - or rather trusting - to be processes. The issue of which concept
may claim the more primordial origins is outside the focus of this analysis - it is the
transition from the one to the other which is the key issue.
Furthermore, both authors consider the impact of meso- and macro-level contexts but
disagree on how these are experienced by people. Williamson takes institutions and
governance to provide information included in the process of calculating the right
decision. Løgstrup, on the other hand, takes context to be fundamentally familiar or
taken-for-granted, as Schütz (1967) puts it, and only when suspicions destabilise
familiarity is context analysed in the sense of calculativeness.
In the following sections, I will first engage Williamson's analysis of coercive
situations to illustrate the differences between Williamson's notions of calculativeness
and decision and Løgstrup's notions of familiarity and trust. Second, I will discuss how
Journal of Trust Research
37

the institutional context, trust, familiarity and calculativeness may conceivably interact in
Løgstrup's point of view engaging Williamson's analysis of calculativeness in the context
of market institutions and governance.
Trust and calculativeness in situations
Williamson reviews examples of calculative trust from Coleman's (1990) Foundations of
Social Theory. In one example, a girl decides to accompany a newly acquainted boy
through the woods on his request and is subsequently sexually assaulted. The fact that she
follows the boy into the woods Williamson explains by three possible scenarios: (1) She
did not have the time to figure out that this was a bad decision; (2) She was flustered and
failed to figure out the right decision; and (3) Norms of behaviour and good manners
required her to accept the boy's request and she failed to devise a socially acceptable
excuse for refusing. All three explanations identify the situation as one of risk and her
calculations as partial or incomplete, resulting in a disastrous outcome. However, another
possible interpretation emerges if we follow Løgstrup. If trust is taken as the default
attitude within familiar worlds, it may simply be that it never occurred to the girl that it
was a risk situation. Talking to a boy of similar age and walking home from school with
an acquaintance are after all thoroughly familiar situations. If nothing untoward happens
to raise her suspicion, the girl will draw on embodied, familiar repertoires of interaction
and stay in the default mode of trust.
Both renderings may account for the example, but this illustrates how trust based on
familiarity is quite different from calculativeness based on knowledge. On the one hand,
familiarity does not take in the completely naturalised character of confidence (Luhmann,
1988), in which features of the system and natural environment are experienced
as continuous, stable and essentially unchanged by whatever actions one chooses.
Confidence describes complexity reduction in regard to the complex interactions and
probabilities of social and physical contexts, but not in regard to the contingency
associated with an Other (Luhmann, 1988). Nor, on the other hand, is familiarity the
highly reflexive and laborious process of calculativeness in which the world is turned into
knowledge and evidence that must be carefully scrutinised. Rather, it is the diffused
experience and expectation of repetition: social interactions in the future will generally
develop as social interactions did in the past (Løgstrup, 1997; Vaitkus, 1991). Thoroughly
familiar situations allow us to have positive, yet diffuse expectations and open ourselves
to the situation without resort to calculativeness. Furthermore, familiarity allows us to
interact without guarding ourselves in advance, and while trust is neither caused by nor is
a type of familiarity; familiarity allows trust to take hold of the situation.
Reconnecting with Williamson's argument, we cannot know whether the girl
accompanied the boy on the basis of familiarity and (misplaced) trust or risk and (failed)
calculativeness, as this is an empirical question. For Williamson, trust is relevant only in
highly familiar interpersonal relationships, but the earlier argument shows that non-
calculative trust may be salient even in relation to relative strangers. We should,
according to Løgstrup, consider familiarity a pervasive characteristic of social life.
Consequently, the transition between calculativeness and trust becomes an empirical
question of how typifications and institutions of the life-world map any given situation.
Williamson's approach leads us to retrace the girl's calculated decisions, the information
that was available to her, and how at any point in the sequence of decisions it seemed
justified to her to go a step further: to talk to the boy, to walk home with the boy and to
enter the woods with the boy. The phenomenological analysis, in contrast, leads us to
38
M. Frederiksen

focus on how a walk home through the woods could easily be the spontaneous direction
of a conversation between a boy and a girl of the same age, depending on the life-world
shared by the two and the group to which they belong. If unfamiliar, the situation seems a
mystery of ill-advised decisions in the face of risk. If familiar, it appears as the most
natural thing since this is exactly what trusting does: it leaves us open and responsive to
other people. Moreover, in spite of Williamson's intentions with the example, he
inadvertently comes to assume familiarity. Assuming that the girl does not have enough
time or fails to make the calculation indicates that she was somehow caught up in the
flow of the situation. How one becomes distracted or caught up in a situation is,
nevertheless, outside the vocabulary of calculativeness, and here Løgstrup's analysis is
helpful. Being caught up in a situation is not a faulty mode of calculativeness, but rather
the very process character of the openness involved in trusting. In this regard, there is
some common ground between the notion of familiarity and Simon's (1957) notion of
bounded rationality.
Having argued that familiarity is often a precondition for trusting and that trusting
may be salient in any type of familiar situation, the following paragraphs question the role
which Williamson assigns to context in enhancing the range of calculativeness and his
consequent rejection of trust within market transactions.
The multilevel conditions of trust and calculativeness
Williamson's main argument for extending calculativeness into areas often conceived of
as trust hinges on people's knowledge of the context of a specific transaction. Institutions
and governance are purportedly factored into calculative deliberations extending the
range of strategic and calculative action. Williamson, however, neglects to consider the
importance of networks, culture and regulation as structures of 'governance' in non-
market relations. Williamson's dichotomous treatment of market and personal relations is
drawn into question when we take non-market institutions into account since these
coexist with market institutions (Beckert, 2003; Granovetter, 1985).
Drawing on both Løgstrup and Schütz, we need to consider the impact of institutions
and governance on familiarity and the transition from trust to calculativeness. Recurrent
experiences are transformed into habitual, tacit expectations not only including the
physical environment and interpersonal relations: social institutions are very much part of
the experience. Institutions are etched into what we familiarly take for granted and
co-constitute the typifications that we employ in understanding the world (Schütz &
Luckmann, 1973).
Contrarily to Williamson's position, institutions are not always experienced as
separate, outside forces that moderate interaction. In fact, many social institutions are
taken for granted in providing us with (1) a familiar level of monitoring and issues to
be monitored (if any), (2) a set of meaningful, familiar outcomes and intentions of
participants to be expected and (3) a habitual way of perceiving the interaction relation
and the wider network in which it is embedded (Løgstrup, 1995; Schütz & Luckmann,
1973). Institutions comprise the (assumed) shared structures of the life-world supplying
habitual understanding and interpretation of situations and how to carry on in interaction -
we are familiar with the institutional context. This institutional context reduces the pressure
of dealing with the contingency associated with alterity. Meeting a stranger without
knowing 'what kind' of meeting it is seems far more unsettling to familiarity than are
well-defined meetings. Meeting a complete stranger or a postman in a dark alley are
fundamentally similar situations in terms of contingency, but we have a better grasp of the
Journal of Trust Research
39

motives - or 'in-order-to' causes (Schütz, 1967, p. 88) - driving the postman's behaviour
than we do of those of the stranger due to the obvious institutional context associated
with the postman. In contrast to James' (2014) argument, this would suggest that moral
dispositions may in many cases be part of what is taken for granted.
Another example from Coleman may serve to illustrate the significance of this
argument even within market settings. In Williamson's analysis of the shipyard example,
both the Amsterdam bank and the shipyard's reasons for refusing to bear the financial risk
are grounded in their lack of knowledge, experience and institutional assurance. The
merchant banker, however, has the knowledge, experience and institutional assurance to
make a calculated decision to bear the risk, according to Williamson. Nonetheless, we
would be equally justified in arguing that the banker's knowledge of the ship owner's
personal integrity, his experience with this type of situation, and the institutional
expectations, roles and assurances built into the transaction allows him to experience the
situation as familiar. The merchant banker is, consequently, not on his guard and trusts the
ship owner unless something induces him to become suspicious. Institutions contribute to
framing the situation in terms of familiarity. Institutions, whether market or otherwise, may
both underpin familiarity and be submitted to calculation. Consequently, we cannot a priori
rule out that trust may emerge within markets, or that calculativeness may emerge within
close personal relations. These are empirical questions, but the categorical division that
Williamson argues for is theoretically untenable (see also Karpik, 2014, for a different, but
parallel argument).
Following Løgstrup' argument that trust and calculativeness belong to different
modes of being-in-the-world, we can imagine four configurations of trust, familiarity and
calculativeness. The first is trust within familiarity, in which familiarity allows us to keep
down our guard in engaging the other, and the openness with which we consequently
meet each other initiates the process of trusting. The second is calculativeness without
familiarity, which is what Williamson envisions. This configuration involves the taking-
nothing-for-granted assessment of the interaction partners, institutional settings and
assurance, and secondary sources of information on both partners and institutions. Third,
calculativeness within familiarity describes an intermediate configuration about which
both Løgstrup and Williamson are silent. This configuration refers to situations in which
one is familiarly on guard. A number of transactions within and outside markets
obviously involve calculativeness, but here familiar institutions work to limit the 'issues'
to be calculated instead of being subjected to calculation. Of all the things that a banker
potentially might have to deal with, much is locked away in infrastructure, institutions,
aggregated measures, report systems, assessment algorithms and so forth. These things
become the familiar world of the banker and require no calculation, leaving the banker to
be intensely calculative about a much more limited subset of things and actions (see also
Cohen, 2014). Finally, we can in theory imagine trust without familiarity in which two
people open up to the sovereign expression of trust despite unfamiliarity. However, this is
a problematic concept because, as Simmel (1950) convincingly argues, even the stranger
belongs to a familiar category. We may consequently be justified in questioning whether
there is truly such a thing as a completely unfamiliar meeting, given the shared humanity
of those interacting.
Conclusion and implications
To sum up, the phenomenology of trust developed by Løgstrup concurs with Williamson that
trust and calculativeness are inimical but also draws two of Williamson's ideas into question.
40
M. Frederiksen

First, Løgstrup posits that trust is a mode of openness in interaction based on familiarity rather
than on the calculative decision to trust. When familiarity is put into question, suspicion arises
and calculativeness is applied. Trust and calculativeness are consequently different modes of
engaging in interaction, rather than respectively output and assessment process. Second,
Løgstrup argues that the fundamental conditions of human existence vary incrementally, but
not fundamentally between different institutional settings. Consequently, market relations,
economic organisations and non-market social institutions are overlapping, multilayered
contexts of interaction which may be experienced as familiar, resulting in trust - or risky,
resulting in calculativeness. The fact that outcomes may seem calculable to the researcher by
no means implies that calculation does in fact take place.
Clarifying the relationship between calculativeness and trust is important both
theoretically and empirically. Williamson's claim that trust is a user-friendly and much
too general concept is justified in terms of the lacking conceptual and analytical clarity of
the trust concept in general. However, this is equally true of the calculativeness concept.
Calculativeness is a concept meant to describe what people do and how they make sense
of their world. In this regard, a separation of trust and calculativeness - whether
theoretical or empirical - must take subjective experience as its point of departure.
Furthermore, the argument presented here underscores the need to take the social
character of market relations and economic organisations into consideration. This not only
means that markets are more like other kinds of social interaction than is often assumed - it
also means that other kinds of social interaction are more like market relations than is often
assumed. Consequently, we should expect to find both calculativeness and trust in both
places. Our a priori assumptions are useless in any specific situation unless we seek to be
empirically sensitive to the way people actually experience it. An additional aspect to this
is that the boundary between trust and calculativeness depends on institutional structures
and consequently on shared life-worlds. Since these, according to Schütz and Gurwitsch,
are fundamentally linked to group belonging and socialisation, the line between trust and
calculativeness depends not only on situations but also on social differentiation.
Finally, this analysis suggests an interesting and important area for trust research.
While trust theories, including Williamson's, predominantly suggest that betrayal is the
opposite of trust, betrayal is more linked to emotional responses to misplaced trust. It
makes more sense to consider calculativeness as the opposite of trust. This would indicate
that there is an important research agenda on tipping points and phases of transition
between the two modes. Differences between situations, institutions and previous
experiences are somehow brought together in different ways to underpin either trust or
calculativeness. While each concept is already being subjected to intense investigation,
empirical investigations of the relationship between them may prove an equally important
area for research. Furthermore, a clarification of that relationship would help us
understand the embedded nature of market relations at the level of subjectivity.
Acknowledgements
The author thanks Guido Möllering and two anonymous reviewers for helpful and insightful
comments and suggestions.
Note on contributor
Morten Frederiksen, Ph.D. (Sociology, Copenhagen University) is Assistant Professor at
Centre for Comparative Welfare Studies at Aalborg University. His main areas of research
Journal of Trust Research
41

include values, norms and justifications in general and trust, social justice and institutional
legitimacy of welfare states and social policies in particular.
References
Beckert, J. (2003). Economic sociology and embeddedness: How shall we conceptualize economic
action? Journal of Economic Issues, 37, 769-787.
Brown, P. R. (2009). The phenomenology of trust: A Schutzian analysis of the social construction
of knowledge by gynae-oncology patients. Health, Risk & Society, 11, 391-407.
Cohen, M. (2014). Genuine, non-calculative trust with calculative antecedents: Reconsidering
Williamson on trust. Journal of Trust Research, 4(1), 44-56.
Coleman, J. S. (1990). Foundations of social theory. Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of
Harvard University Press.
Cox, E. (2012). Individual and organizational trust in a reciprocal peer coaching context. Mentoring
& Tutoring: Partnership in Learning, 20, 427-443.
Elster, J. (2007). Explaining social behavior: More nuts and bolts for the social sciences. New
York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Fink, H., & MacIntyre, A. (1997). Introduction. In K. E. Løgstrup (Ed.), The ethical demand (pp.
xv-xxxviii). Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.
Gambetta, D. (1988). Can we trust trust? In D. Gambetta (Ed.), Trust: Making and breaking
cooperative relations (pp. 213-237). Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Garfinkel, H. (1963). A conception of and experiments with 'trust' as a condition of stable
concerted actions. In O. J. Harvey (Ed.), Motivation and social interaction (pp. 187-238). New
York, NY: Ronald Press.
Giddens, A. (1990). The consequences of modernity. Cambridge: Polity.
Granovetter, M. (1985). Economic action and social structure: The problem of embeddedness.
American Journal of Sociology, 91, 481-510.
Heidegger, M. (1962). Being and time. New York, NY: Harper and Row.
James, H. S. Jr., (2014). You can have your trust and calculativeness, too: Uncertainty,
trustworthiness and the Williamson thesis. Journal of Trust Research, 4(1), 57-65.
Karpik, L. (2014). Trust: Reality or illusion? A critical examination of Williamson. Journal of Trust
Research, 4(1), 22-33.
Løgstrup, K. E. (1995). Ophav og omgivelse. [meta fysik 3]. København: Gyldendal.
Løgstrup, K. E. (1997). The ethical demand. Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.
Løgstrup, K. E. (2007). Rejoinder. In K. V. K. Niekerk (Ed.), Beyond the ethical demand
(pp. 1-48). Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.
Luhmann, N. (1979). Trust and power: Two works by Niklas Luhmann. New York, NY: John Wiley
& Sons.
Luhmann, N. (1988). Familiarity, confidence, trust: Problems and alternatives. In D. Gambetta
(Ed.), Trust: Making and breaking cooperative relations (pp. 94-107). Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Misztal, B. A. (2011). Trust: Acceptance of, precaution against and cause of vulnerability.
Comparative Sociology, 10, 358-379.
Möllering, G. (2001). The nature of trust: From Georg Simmel to a theory of expectation,
interpretation and suspension. Sociology, 35, 403-420.
Möllering, G. (2006). Trust: Reason, routine, reflexivity. Oxford: Elsevier.
Möllering, G. (2013). Process views of trusting and crises. In R. Bachmann & A. Zaheer (Ed.),
Handbook of advances in trust research (pp. 285-305). Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Niekerk, K. V. K. (2007). Introduction. In K. V. K. Niekerk (Ed.), Beyond the ethical demand (pp.
ix-xxxi). Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.
Offe, C. (1999). How can we trust our fellow citizens? In M. E. Warren (Ed.), Democracy and trust.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Schütz, A. (1967). The phenomenology of the social world. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University
Press.
Schütz, A., & Luckmann, T. (1973). The structures of the life-world. Evanston, IL: Northwestern
University Press.
Simmel, G. (1950). The stranger. In K. H. Wolff (Ed.), The sociology of Georg Simmel (pp. 402-408).
Glencoe, IL: The Free Press.
42
M. Frederiksen

Simon, H. A. (1957). Models of man; social and rational. Oxford: Wiley.
Sztompka, P. (1999). Trust: A sociological theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Vaitkus, S. (1990). The crisis as a bankruptcy of trust: The fiduciary attitude, human nature and
ethical science. International Sociology, 5, 287-298.
Vaitkus, S. (1991). How is society possible? Intersubjectivity and the fiduciary attitude as problems
of the social group in Mead, Gurwitsch, and Schutz. Dordrecht: Klüwer Academic.
Williamson, O. E. (1993). Calculativeness, trust, and economic organization. Journal of Law and
Economics, 36, 453-486.
Zucker, L. G. (1986). Production of trust: Institutional sources of economic structure, 1840-1920.
Research in Organizational Behavior, 8, 53-111.
Journal of Trust Research
43

