International Journal of Philosophical Studies
ISSN: 0967-2559 (Print) 1466-4542 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/riph20
Second Nature, Critical Theory and Hegel's
Phenomenology
Michael A. Becker
To cite this article: Michael A. Becker (2018) Second Nature, Critical Theory and Hegel's
Phenomenology, International Journal of Philosophical Studies, 26:4, 523-545, DOI:
10.1080/09672559.2018.1488268
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/09672559.2018.1488268
Published online: 08 Oct 2018.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 520
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=riph20

ARTICLE
Second Nature, Critical Theory and Hegel's
Phenomenology
Michael A. Becker
Philosophy, New School for Social Research, New York, NY, USA
ABSTRACT
While Hegel's concept of second nature has now received substantial attention
from commentators, relatively little has been said about the place of this
concept in the Phenomenology of Spirit. This neglect is understandable, since
Hegel does not explicitly use the phrase 'second nature' in this text.
Nonetheless, several closely related phrases reveal the centrality of this concept
to the Phenomenology's structure. In this paper, I develop new interpretations of
the ﬁgures 'natural consciousness', 'natural notion', and 'inorganic nature', in
order to elucidate the distinctive concept of second nature at work in the
Phenomenology. I will argue that this concept of second nature supplements
the 'oﬃcial' version, developed in the Encyclopedia, with an 'unoﬃcial' version
that preﬁgures its use in critical theory. At the same time, this reconstruction will
allow us to see how the Phenomenology essentially documents spirit's acquisi-
tion of a 'second nature'.
KEYWORDS Hegel; critical theory; Frankfurt School; Phenomenology of Spirit; second nature; German
idealism
1. Introduction: Hegel and Second Nature
There is now a substantial literature on Hegel's concept of second nature.1
There have been multiple reasons for this interest. A number of scholars have
looked to Hegel's writings on this topic out of a general concern for the
'naturalism' question.2 For these philosophers, second nature, conceived pri-
marily as 'habit', is a promising concept in the eﬀort to non-reductively situate
human mindedness in the natural order of things. At the same time, Frankfurt
School theorists have long been drawn to the ambiguously 'critical' dimensions
of this concept, expanded to encompass culture more generally.3 For these
theorists, second nature paradoxically expresses both the socio-historical con-
stitution of human spirit, and its 'naturalization' into something that appears
ossiﬁed, or estranged from human thought and will.
Now both of these camps, when they discuss Hegel, have focused mainly
on the Encyclopedia Philosophy of Spirit and Philosophy of Right though,
CONTACT Michael A. Becker
mabeck01@gmail.com
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
2018, VOL. 26, NO. 4, 523-545
https://doi.org/10.1080/09672559.2018.1488268
© 2018 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

more recently, connections have been established to the Lectures on the
Philosophy of History and the Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion.4 Rarely,
however, do these commentators refer to Hegel's 1807 Phänomenologie des
Geistes (henceforth PhG) at any length.5 This omission is both unsurprising
and slightly odd. It is unsurprising for the obvious reason that, unlike the
Encyclopedia and Philosophy of Right, the PhG does not contain the phrase
'second nature' at all. The absence of attention is also odd, though, and not
only because Hegel's text famously centers upon the ur-mechanism
of second nature in every sense: enculturation or Bildung. Beyond this,
the PhG capitalizes upon a set of intimately related, recurring expressions
that form a transparent constellation around this very theme.
More speciﬁcally, I will argue that the tropes of 'natural consciousness'
(natürliche Bewußtsein), 'natural notion' (natürliche Vorstellung), and 'inor-
ganic nature' (unorganische Natur) are for Hegel inseparable aspects of
spirit's second nature writ large. Interpreting these expressions in the way
I suggest will have broader implications for reading the PhG as a whole. We
will ﬁnd that the PhG grounds a distinctive concept of second nature that
both supplements and complicates the version developed in Hegel's other
writings, since it anticipates the 'defetishizing' use it will have for the
Frankfurt School. At the same time, this analysis will enable us to appreciate
that and how the PhG essentially documents spirit's acquisition of a second
nature.
We begin (part 2) by rehearsing Hegel's 'oﬃcial' account of second
nature, developed in the Encyclopedia Philosophy of Spirit, before (part 3)
considering an 'unoﬃcial' conception of second nature found in the writ-
ings of critical theory - a conception that, though credited to Hegel,
substantially departs from the 'oﬃcial' account. We will then turn (parts
4, 5, 6 and 7) to the PhG itself, and speciﬁcally to Hegel's use of the phrases
'natural consciousness', 'natural notion' and 'inorganic nature'. Our analysis
will show that, while the 'oﬃcial' version is detectible in the PhG, the
'unoﬃcial' concept of second nature is more clearly Hegel's focus. We
will conclude (part 8) with some reﬂections on the broader signiﬁcance of
these claims.
2. Second Nature and Habit
Before turning to the PhG itself, then, let us rehearse Hegel's best-known
treatment of second nature, found at §410 in his Philosophy of Spirit Hegel
(2007).6 In this place, a relatively inchoate form of selfhood designated
'soul' acquires a more stable unity against the 'sensations' that otherwise
engulf
it.
This
is
accomplished,
Hegel
claims,
through
the
mechanism
of
'habit'
[Gewohnheit]. Practical repetition inures the self against disturbing or
524
M. A. BECKER

otherwise distracting sensations7 - one is 'habituated' to the cold - so that a
formerly scattered attention may be stabilized and focused upon other
priorities.8 It is in this context that the phrase 'second nature' (zweite
Natur) initially appears:
Habit has rightly been called a second nature: nature, because it is an
immediate being of the soul, a second nature, because it is an immediacy
posited by the soul, incorporating and moulding the bodiliness that pertains
to the determinations of feeling as such and to the determinacies of repre-
sentation and of the will in so far as they are embodied (Hegel §410 R)
This passage suggests that, in a general way, habit is a second nature
inasmuch as, via repetition, one has appropriated and reformed a ﬁrst
nature - roughly speaking, one's animal embodiment.9 At the same time,
this second nature nonetheless remains a 'nature', in the sense of something
'still burdened with the form of being' (Hegel §410 Z). (An action per-
formed out of habit, we are told, has been 'made into something that is
natural, mechanical' (Hegel §410 R).10 Removed from our conscious atten-
tion, that is, a habit becomes as thoroughly 'instinctive' as our ﬁrst nature.)
Hegel is quick to evoke the far-reaching implications of this human
capacity, ostensibly 'a form that embraces all kinds and stages of spirit's
activity' (Hegel §410 R). In fact, Hegel's varied examples of habit do reﬂect
such a spectrum, from relatively passive capabilities (such as consistently
detaching one's awareness from unpleasant sensations), to fairly sophisti-
cated activities and practices (such as writing by hand or playing a musical
instrument). Perhaps for this reason, Hegel claims that
habit is the most essential feature of the existence of all spiritual life [aller
Geistigkeit] in the individual subject, enabling the subject to be concrete
immediacy, to be soulful ideality, enabling the content, religious content,
moral content, etc., to belong to it as this self . . . in its very being. (Hegel
§410 R)
Now for our present purposes, what matters most in this characterization is
the conception of 'second nature' as, generically, the embodied expression of
norms. As Hegel later puts it, 'since the individual activities of man acquire by
repeated practice the character of habit . . . the soul brings into its expressions
a universal mode of acting . . . a rule' (Hegel §410 R). Precisely through
habituation, a 'rule' or 'content' - notably including moral and religious
content - may become a component of one's bodily, instinctive 'second
nature'. Indeed, Hegel intimates that suﬃcient repetition secures one's iden-
tiﬁcation with the norm in question, so that it becomes the pre-reﬂective basis
of one's bodily disposition. The highest levels of spirit, in particular, depend
upon such a possibility: '[T]he habit of right in general, of the ethical, has the
content of freedom (Hegel §410 R).' Only as habituated, then, are principles
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
525

of Sittlichkeit 'naturally' - decisively and without reluctance - expressed or
concretized in one's actions.11
Yet as multiple commentators have remarked, Hegel's conception
of second nature is emphatically double-edged.12 Precisely because habit
remains 'an immediate being of the soul' (Hegel §410 R), or something
unreﬂectively 'mechanical' Hegel (§410 R), Hegel will write:
[A]lthough, on the one hand, by habit a man becomes free, yet, on the other
hand, habit makes him its slave. Habit is not an immediate, ﬁrst nature . . .
But all the same it is still a nature, something posited that assumes the shape
of immediacy, an ideality of beings that is itself still burdened with the form
of being, consequently something not corresponding to free spirit, something
merelyanthropological (Hegel §410 Z)
On the one hand, then, Hegel insists upon the decisive 'liberation . . . that man
gains through habit' (Hegel §410 R). Most signiﬁcantly, habit may inculcate
the principles of a genuinely ethical orientation, enabling an agent to do what
is required of her - meeting the expectations of her social role or station -
unhesitatingly and without the 'vanity' of moral reﬂection.13
On the other hand, Hegel is equally insistent that these norm-inﬂected
'habits' may pose diﬃculties for the agent whose 'second nature' they have
become. The Philosophy of Spirit indicates that even a benign or admirable
habit, just because it is 'mechanical', prevents an individual from concretely
grasping changed conditions and adapting to them.14 And at the more
general level of a 'form of life', too, Hegel alludes to the potentially
destructive consequences of a routinized second nature. In such cases,
pervasively habitual dispositions, embodying now-surpassed norms, may
positively obstruct a spiritual development whose time has come.15 Our
aﬀective identiﬁcation with the mores of a form of life, secured via pro-
cesses of enculturation, makes them highly resistant to the 'challenges' of
either novel circumstances or rational argumentation.16
3. Second Nature in Critical Theory
I will return to these 'critical' dimensions of second nature shortly. For the
moment, though, and by way of transitioning to my interpretation of the
PhG, I want to draw attention to another use of the expression 'second
nature': the one that pervades the Frankfurt School corpus. This usage, too,
has a purportedly Hegelian provenance, while likewise evincing a 'critical'
function. And yet it is unquestionably distinct from the conception we have
just explicated. Consider, for example, the following representative passage
from Adorno's Negative Dialectics, which conveys a speciﬁc understanding
of critical theory's debt to Hegel's concept:
526
M. A. BECKER

The theory of second nature, to which Hegel already gave a critical tinge, is
not lost to a negative dialectics. It assumes, tel quel, the abrupt immediacy,
the formations which society and its evolution present to our thought; and it
does this so that analysis may bare its mediations to the extent of the
immanent diﬀerence between phenomena and that which they claim to be
in themselves (Adorno 1973, 38)
Here Adorno clearly associates Hegel's 'theory of second nature' with the
program of 'defetishizing critique': the theoretical eﬀort to expose a
seeming 'immediacy' as something socially and historically 'mediated'.17
Paradigmatically, such an analysis demonstrates that what masquerades as
an immutable 'law of nature' - say, the market economy - is in reality the
product of a historically determinate, hence mutable, sociopolitical
arrangement.18 Or again, in the vocabulary we have been contemplating:
we discover that a spiritual 'second nature' (i.e. a culturally evolved norm,
practice or institution) has appeared to thought as a 'ﬁrst nature'
(i.e. something unalterably 'beyond human control' that - for just this
reason - seems justiﬁed).19
Yet is Adorno entirely warranted in ascribing a defetishizing dimension
to Hegel's theory of second nature? Our précis of §410 in the Philosophy of
Spirit casts doubt on this ascription, or at least complicates it. The technical
terms themselves, in any case, have slightly diﬀerent referents. To be sure,
for both Hegel and Adorno, 'second nature' assuredly pertains to culture in
some expanded sense - habitual ethical dispositions and political arrange-
ments alike have at some stage been brought about or 'posited' by human
activity. Yet in the Philosophy of Spirit, 'ﬁrst nature' refers - uncritically - to
one's instinctive animal endowment, out of which a 'second nature' may be
habituated; while Adorno uses 'ﬁrst nature' in a critical way, to capture the
deceitful 'abrupt immediacy' or quasi-natural appearance assumed by
this second nature. 20
More to the point, it does not seem to be Hegel's considered view of second
nature that it appears speciously 'natural' to thought. The Philosophy of Spirit
does not suggest, for example, that any self 'habituated' to a norm will either (a)
forget that this norm was initially something 'posited', or (b) mistake this norm
for a piece of unchanging, non-human 'nature'.21 Thus we may conclude that,
in Hegel's writings, the concept of second nature precisely lacks the 'critical
tinge' that Adorno imputes to it in the passage above.22
In the remainder of this article I will problematize this verdict. I will argue
that Hegel does in practice propound a version of second nature that, while
recalling the Philosophy of Spirit account, ultimately converges with Adorno's
model. For in the PhG, I claim, we encounter both conceptions. On the one
hand, Hegel's text portrays diverse shapes of 'natural consciousness': pre-
reﬂective, 'habitual' dispositions embodying determinate 'norms' that have
been 'posited' as their 'second nature'. (These norms, we will gradually see,
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
527

are the 'natural notions' held by consciousness and, taken together, constitute
its 'inorganic nature'.) On the other hand, however, we are continuously
confronted in the PhG with the spectacle of an emphatically social and
historical consciousness - the bearer of a 'second nature' - that continuously
mistakes its norms for something immediately 'natural': a given 'ﬁrst nature' in
that critical sense censured by the Frankfurt School.23 Let us turn to the PhG,
then, in order to conﬁrm and develop these suggestions.
4. Natural Consciousness and Non-philosophy
In another article, I have reconstructed the PhG's method of 'immanent'
examination, showing how Hegel thematizes, criticizes and ﬁnally subverts
the diverse shapes of 'natural consciousness' (das natürliche Bewußtsein).24
In that place I made two claims regarding this ﬁgure that I would like to
elaborate now in greater detail. I argued, ﬁrst, that a shape of natural
consciousness is something like a fundamental character-type or human
attitude, familiar to us from both human history and everyday life. For
example, a given shape may express a broadly 'Stoic', or a 'Virtuous', or an
'Enlightened' attitude - the character trait at issue typically ﬁgures by name
in the relevant section. Second, though, I suggested these shapes are aptly
called 'natural' because they are unreﬂective and spontaneous dispositions
that always seem to come - so to speak - 'naturally'.
Now it follows from these descriptions that the shapes of natural conscious-
ness are not principally 'philosophies' or even, as rule, reﬂective.25 This inference
may appear counterintuitive since - to be sure - Hegel does repeatedly articulate
these orientations as discursive, i.e. philosophical 'claims' that can be examined.
That is, each shape can and will be re-transcribed as a shape of 'phenomenal
knowing'.26 As natural, however, these shapes are not, in the ﬁrst instance,
articulate or reﬂective theories, so much as concrete, spontaneous attitudes
embodied in observable conduct-types and life-projects. The distinction is
intimated in the 'Introduction' (Einleitung), where it is evidently natural con-
sciousness that 'wants to remain in thoughtless indolence' (para. 80), while
phenomenal knowing is the 'thought [that] spoils the thoughtlessness, and
[whose] unrest disturbs the indolence' (para. 80).27 But in the 'Preface'
(Vorrede), too, Hegel notoriously suggests this: 'For the natural consciousness
to entrust itself immediately to science would be to make an attempt, induced by
it knows not what, to walk upside down all of a sudden' (para. 26). In other
words, natural consciousness is just that disposition that - its conservative
impulses notwithstanding - is coaxed into a reﬂective articulation and account-
ing of itself.28
If this intuition is correct, then in the PhG Hegel settles accounts, not
with rival philosophies - more credibly the task of his Lectures on the
History of Philosophy or even the Science of Logic - but with fundamentally
528
M. A. BECKER

sub-philosophical opponents.29 Now this assumption should not be espe-
cially controversial, since very few 'shapes' in the PhG are identiﬁable as
conventional positions or important doctrines in the history of philosophy.
A few are identiﬁed by name - for instance, Stoicism and Skepticism. And
others have uncontroversial sources or referents, as does Humean
'Perception' or Kantian 'Law Testing'. Yet even those few shapes that do
appear straightforwardly philosophical are arguably of interest to Hegel
chieﬂy as outgrowths of largely unreﬂective impulses, life-processes and
activities.30 In any event, we will immediately observe that many more of
the PhG's shapes are drawn directly from non-philosophical realms of
human culture, in the widest sense: literary, romantic, scientiﬁc, laboring,
political, religious and a great deal more.
5. A Note on Method
Now the very language I have used to explicate natural consciousness should
already dispose us to the interpretation I am proposing. To call each shape a
'pre-reﬂective, habitual, spontaneous attitude' is, at least on a rhetorical level,
to intimate some sort of connection to Hegel's 'oﬃcial' conception of second
nature. But before developing this vague connection into something more
explicit, we must brieﬂy describe an additional characteristic of natural
consciousness that is integral to Hegel's method in the PhG. Speciﬁcally, we
will observe that each shape of natural consciousness is committed to some
determinate 'ground-norm' that is foundational to its self-understanding, or
the way a shape grasps and values itself: say, 'independence', or 'freedom', or
'pleasure' or the 'heart's law'.31 (Somewhat confusingly, Hegel will at diﬀerent
places call this ground-norm a shape's 'in itself', 'essence', 'criterion', 'object'
or 'concept'.)
Furthermore - and crucially, for our purposes - Hegel believes that
holding a ground-norm will have practical implications. Thus we are con-
tinuously shown how every attitude organizes its behavior around the
ground-norm in question.32 In other words, to idealize a particular ground-
norm - to relate to it as a 'certainty', as Hegel sometimes puts it - is at the
same time to commit to a speciﬁc range of behavior that embodies or
expresses it. To value myself as a master, for example - to credibly enjoy a
masterly self-understanding - is precisely to attempt to organize my life
practically, in the widest sense, around the value of 'independence'.33
Now this short elaboration enables us to perceive the basic continuity
between the PhG and the Philosophy of Spirit's 'oﬃcial' conception
of second nature. For I am proposing that each shape of natural conscious-
ness assimilates and expresses its 'ground-norm' in precisely the way that,
via habit, the self comes to embody a rule, principle, or 'content'. Recall
that, in the Philosophy of Spirit, an individual may so thoroughly integrate a
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
529

norm that it becomes an instinctive 'second nature' - a particular 'mould-
ing' of its animal endowment or 'ﬁrst nature'. Through practical repetition,
one may even develop an aﬀective identiﬁcation with this content, such that
one's general orientation and behavior become embodied expressions of it.
To repeat Hegel's words: 'habit is the most essential feature of the existence
of all spiritual life [aller Geistigkeit] in the individual subject . . . enabling the
content, religious content, moral content, etc., to belong to it as this self . . .
in its very being.'34
Yet we will immediately see that this description also captures the status
of natural consciousness. On the one hand, the PhG itself leaves no doubt
that every shape originates out of a kind of 'ﬁrst nature' - namely, the
animal 'proto-self' described in Hegel's reﬂections on 'life' at the beginning
of the 'Self-Consciousness' chapter (See paras 166-177). On the other hand,
however, every succeeding shape so intimately identiﬁes with its deﬁning
'essence' that it both (a) instinctively expresses it in its mode of thought and
behavior, and (b) is perpetually afraid of losing it to Hegel's 'testing proce-
dure'. Why else, we might ask, would 'anxiety over the truth . . . strive to
hold on to what it is in danger of losing' (para. 80)? Why else, indeed,
would consciousness experience the entire PhG as a protracted 'path of
despair' (para. 78)? Well-known formulations like these are only intelligible
because natural consciousness is nothing else but the foundational, yet
ultimately unsustainable 'concept' it has incorporated:
Natural consciousness will prove to be only the concept of knowing . . . But
while it immediately regards itself rather as real knowing, this path has
negative meaning for it, and what is the realization of the concept will
count instead, to it, as the loss of itself, for on this path, it loses its truth.
(para. 78)
Only the self's aﬀective, bodily identiﬁcation with its norms could explain
the anxiety aroused by a threat to those norms, or its subsequent perception
of 'self loss' when these norms are dissolved. For only in the event of such a
thoroughgoing identiﬁcation - only when, as Hegel puts it, 'consciousness
is for its own self its concept' (para. 80) - would a threat to that norm
constitute a threat to the very self whose norm it is. My proposal is that the
achievement of this aﬀective identiﬁcation is ﬁnally inconceivable apart
from the process of 'habituation' Hegel recounts,35 through which these
norms can come 'to belong to it as this self . . . in its very being'.36
6. Second Nature and Natural Notions
In the preceding section, we established a point of continuity between the
PhG and Hegel's 'oﬃcial' conception of second nature. In this section, we
will begin to uncover the 'unoﬃcial' conception of second nature developed
530
M. A. BECKER

in the PhG - a conception without any clear basis in the Philosophy of
Spirit, but which preﬁgures the 'defetishizing' version adopted in the writ-
ings of critical theory. The oﬃcial account, we have seen, centers on the
bodily incorporation of 'norms' that are thence instinctively expressed in
conduct as a 'second nature'. The Frankfurt School account, by contrast,
arises in an alleged context of ideological 'fetishism'. At issue here is our
tendency to invest the products of human activity - our cultural 'second
nature' - with a false, 'ﬁrst natural' independence.37 This conception will be
our central focus in the remainder of this article.
To make this case, let us consider the second leitmotif of our inter-
pretation. Hegel repeatedly indicates that every ground-norm that is
spontaneously avowed and expressed by natural consciousness is also a
'natural notion'. We have already implied that the deepest values of
natural consciousness emerge for it as 'givens'. But Hegel insists that
these values only appear as given because natural consciousness has in
each case forgotten its 'prehistory'.38 More speciﬁcally, this means that
natural consciousness is by deﬁnition unaware that its deﬁning value
- upon which its entire identity is founded - has sprung from the failure
of another shape to enact its value. This broader perspective, Hegel
continuously suggests, belongs solely to the reader:
This observation of the matter is our addition [. . . and] is not there for the
consciousness that we are observing [. . . T]he emergence of the new object
[i.e. ground-norm. . .] takes place for us, as it were, behind the back of
consciousness [. . . for which] what has emerged is only as object. (para. 87,
my brackets)
It is solely 'for us', writes Hegel, that every ground-norm 'shows itself to
have come to be through a reversal of consciousness itself', or 'has emerged . .
. as movement and coming-to-be' (para. 87). The philosophical 'We',39 that
is, views each ground-norm genealogically, or as the product of another
ground-norm's examination and collapse.40 But just this perspectival lim-
itation of natural consciousness, I am claiming, accounts for Hegel's
pointed use of the expression 'natural notion'. For this expression invari-
ably connotes a deep conceptual assumption, viz. a ground-norm, which
consciousness only takes as 'natural' because its prehistory has been lost to
memory.
The phrase itself appears in the ﬁrst sentence of the Introduction, and
memorably ﬂags the unremarked presuppositions of modern epistemology -
above all Kant's critical project. In particular, Hegel identiﬁes the pervasive
natural notion that cognition is a faculty that can be inventoried, under-
stood and validated independently of its use and object: 'It is a natural
notion [Es ist eine natürliche Vorstellung]41 that in philosophy, before one
gets down to dealing with . . . the actual cognition of what, in truth, is, it is
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
531

ﬁrst necessary to come to an understanding about cognition' (para. 73). A
moment later, in the same vein, Hegel reiterates that such a framework
'presupposes notions of cognizing [Vorstellungen von dem Erkennen] as an
instrument and as a medium' (para. 74).
At the same time, Hegel does not restrict this phrase's application to
speciﬁcally Kantian notions. In one striking passage, in fact, he strongly
suggests that the PhG's 'self-consummating skepticism' (para. 78) is
nothing else but the project of canvassing and subverting all the
Vorstellungen that grip consciousness in a merely implicit, instinctive,
habitual way:
[T]his kind of skepticism [brings] about a despair regarding . . . so-called natural
notions, thoughts, and opinions [sogenannten natürlichen Vorstellungen,
Gedanken und Meinungen] . . . with which consciousness that goes straightaway
into examining matters is still suﬀused and burdened. (para. 78)
Occasionally, to be sure, Hegel will express this same thought in a slightly
varied way, as when in the Preface he disclaims the impulse of 'calling to
mind habitual notions [gewohnte Vorstellungen]42 as if they were truths
both settled and familiar' (para. 57), or when he challenges 'current notions
[der Vorstellungen unserer Zeit] about the nature and shape of truth' (para.
71) that are at obvious variance with Hegel's own standpoint. The same use
of Vorstellung is equally evident where Hegel alludes to the typical philo-
sopher's ideal of examination - the thinker who merely attempts to discern
whether 'everything said by everybody else . . . match[es] up with his own
notion [seiner Vorstellung] about the matter, or with whether it seems that
way to him and whether or not it is something with which he is familiar
[bekannt]' (para. 31).43 Yet in both the Preface and the Introduction, we will
observe, the pejorative associations of our deceptively familiar but unexa-
mined Vorstellungen are never far from the surface.
But this means that, in some sense, Hegel pursues the type of 'defetishiz-
ing' program we described above. More speciﬁcally, he shows that all the
'so-called natural notions' received by natural consciousness as givens -
deliverances, say, of passive perception, or sensuous inclination, or healthy
common sense, or moral conviction, etc.44 - are very much products of a
spiritual history that is, nonetheless, only perspicuous 'for us'. Or, as
Adorno would phrase it: natural consciousness persistently misrepresents
its posited 'second nature' as an 'abrupt immediacy' that conceals its genesis
in 'society and its evolution' (Adorno 1973, 38).
7. The Inorganic Nature of Natural Consciousness
We are now better prepared to address a third and ﬁnal trope that recurs
throughout the PhG: 'inorganic nature'. But it may help us to make this
532
M. A. BECKER

transition by ﬁrst considering one of Hegel's more intriguing remarks in his
introduction to the 'Reason' chapter:
Consciousness will determine its relationship to otherness, or to its object, in
various ways depending on just which stage it ﬁnds itself occupying vis-à-vis
how the world-spirit is becoming conscious of itself. How consciousness is
immediately to be found, and how it determines itself and its object at any
given time, or how it is for itself, depends on what it has already come to be,
or on what it already is in itself. (para. 234)
We have already emphasized that the norms governing natural conscious-
ness - its own prejudices notwithstanding - are not in reality 'givens', but
essentially products of (now forgotten or suppressed) developments.
Couched in the vocabulary we have elaborated, then, the second sentence
of this passage arguably means something like the following: a given shape's
instinctive attitude ('How consciousness is immediately to be found') is
grounded in one or more pre-reﬂective Vorstellungen ('what it already is in
itself'), which has in each instance issued ('has already come to be') from the
collapse of another. In short, the ground-norm yielded by a shape's self-
inverting examination becomes the foundational second nature of the
succeeding shape, taken as natural consciousness.
But in the ﬁrst sentence of the passage quoted above, Hegel clearly goes
somewhat further than this claim. For he suggests that the various shapes of
consciousness, which until now we have treated simply as individual atti-
tudes, can and should be indexed to developments in the wider culture of a
society. To repeat:
Consciousness will determine its relationship to otherness, or to its object, in
various ways depending on just which stage it ﬁnds itself occupying vis-à-vis
how
the
world-spirit
is
becoming
conscious
of
itself
[des
sich
bewußtwerdenden Weltgeistes]. (para. 234)45
This 'cultural' enlargement of Hegel's second nature thematic is necessary for
grasping our ﬁnal trope. Indeed, in the Preface, immediately prior to introducing
the metaphor of inorganic nature, Hegel insists in the same language that 'the
world spirit .. . had to be examined in the development of its cultural education
[der Weltgeist, in seiner Bildung zu betrachten]' (para. 28), continuing:
[E]ach individual spirit also runs through the culturally formative stages of
the universal spirit, but it runs through them as shapes which spirit has
already laid aside . . . This past existence [vergangne Dasein] has already
become an acquired possession [erworbnes Eigentum] of the universal spirit;
it constitutes the substance of the individual, or, his inorganic nature [unor-
ganische Natur] - and thus appears external to him [so ihm äußerlich
erscheinend]. (para. 28)46
This provocative passage raises several questions. First: what precisely is the
individual's 'substance' or 'inorganic nature'? The answer Hegel provides
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
533

here - that it is spirit's 'past existence', and speciﬁcally 'shapes which spirit
has already laid aside' - is as yet rather vague. Second: why should this
inorganic nature (at least initially) 'appear external' to the individual in
question - particularly if this nature is ostensibly her own? Once again,
Hegel's words leave the causes behind this appearance of externality
obscure.
Now my suggestion, based on Hegel's larger discussion in these sections
(paras 28-33), is that the culture-pervading unorganische Natur at issue
consists precisely in the full set of natürlichen Vorstellungen that, at a certain
stage of development, is characteristic of, and habitually compelling for, a
given individual. The attention we have already paid to Hegel's pointed use of
this expression in the Preface and Introduction has prepared us for its
(otherwise curious) reemergence here. When Hegel transitions from meta-
phorical imagery to conceptual exposition, his portrait of an 'individual . . .
living oﬀthat inorganic nature' (para. 28) is replaced exactly by the indivi-
dual's reﬂective articulation and examination of her everyday 'notions': 'In
this movement, although the individual is spared the sublation of existence
[Daseins], what still remains is the notion of and the familiarity with the
forms [die Vorstellung und die Bekanntschaft mit den Formen]' (para. 30).
The context for this claim - that the thinker's task is to sublate, not
Dasein, but Vorstellungen and Bekanntschaft - is Hegel's overview of the
foremost diﬀerence between the functions of ancient and modern philoso-
phy. On this reckoning, ancient thinking essentially consisted in attaining
universality via abstraction from sensuous, natural, immediate existence.47
By contrast, modern philosophy is charged with the de-familiarization or
de-fetishization of its Vorstellungen: with 'actualizing and spiritually ani-
mating the universal through the sublation of ﬁxed and determinate
thoughts [das Aufheben der festen bestimmten Gedanken]' (para. 33).
Once again, the phrase 'second nature' is useful for connoting the
deceptive familiarity of these Vorstellungen. Hegel's celebrated mot makes
this connotation obvious: 'What is familiar and well known [Das Bekannte]
as such is not really known [nicht erkannt] for the very reason that it is
familiar and well known' (para. 31). In other words, the more thoroughly
consciousness is 'habituated' to any given notion, the less likely it will be to
actually grasp it. In this way, our analysis comports well with our construal
of natural consciousness as a pre-reﬂective attitude or orientation. For
though every 'shape' is premised upon an implicit ground-norm, none-
theless, as natural, consciousness has not yet subjected its inborn 'notions'
to reﬂection and examination, and hence cannot yet grasp them as posited
'second natures' at all. (In Hegel's words, they are still perceived as 'ﬁxed
and determinate thoughts' [para. 33], rather than accurately recognized 'as
movement and coming-to-be' [para. 87].)
534
M. A. BECKER

Let us return now to the additional, 'cultural' dimension that the expres-
sion inorganic nature has introduced. To begin with, it is relatively simple
to grasp how the composition of an individual's second nature might
correspond to the present stage of a society's culture, or the world Gestalt
he or she directly confronts. In the Preface, Hegel appears to simply assume
that the typical, mature participant in modern culture has been endowed,
via routine processes of enculturation, with the most logically developed
fund of norms.48 Further, such a participant has been led through habitua-
tion to pre-reﬂectively and spontaneously identify with these Sitten.49 In
fact, this aspect of the term 'inorganic nature' will be conﬁrmed in the
section of Observing Reason subtitled 'Logical and Psychological Laws'.
Here Hegel clariﬁes, using the same metaphor:
The moments constituting the content of the law are, on the one hand,
individuality itself, and on the other hand, its universal inorganic nature
[allgemeine unorganische Natur], namely, the circumstances, situations,
habits [Gewohnheiten], mores [Sitten], religion, and so forth that it comes
upon [vorgefundenen],50 and it is from these moments that determinate
individuality is to be comprehended. (para. 305)
Here again, as in the Preface, the phrase inorganic nature applies to those
culture-pervading Gewohnheiten and Sitten assimilated by the individual.
There are also indications, though, that this last description properly
belongs to the (one-sided) perspective of Observing Reason. From the
perspective represented in the above passage, inorganic nature is merely
something present, synchronically, for individuality, and therefore some-
thing given that the latter 'comes upon'. But if, as we have seen, the
individual's modern inorganic nature descends in truth from 'shapes
which spirit has already laid aside' (para. 28), then the formula from
Observing Reason will appear incomplete. For it leaves unexpressed the
historical constitution of our second nature, or its diachronic dimension.
How, then, should we interpret Hegel's claim that this second nature, i.e. the
individual's basic stock of unexamined Vorstellungen, is non-arbitrarily con-
nected to spirit's 'past existence' (para. 28)? Our answer must be that, for
Hegel, this second nature is at the same time composed of the pre-history, or
previous stages, of the present culture. Or to speak more precisely: contempor-
ary culture itself has preserved - in an arguably problematic way - the
characteristics of its own past states or conditions.51 An explanation of this
sort is necessary to make sense of a passage like the following:
[T]he particular individual is an incomplete spirit, a concrete shape whose entire
existence falls into one determinateness and in which the other features are only
present as intermingled traits. In any spirit that stands higher than another, the
lower concrete existence has descended to the status of an insigniﬁcant moment;
what was formerly at stake is now only a trace; its shape has been covered over
and has become a simple shading of itself. (para. 28)
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
535

Each individual, accordingly, is the bearer of an inorganic nature - a
mounting ensemble of cultural notions, Gewohnheiten, Sitten, dispositions,
and the like - that has been pressed over the course of spirit's history. The
PhG chronicles this history, of course, and shows how such dispositions
actually give body to increasingly rational self-understandings.52 Yet Hegel
also suggests that, chronologically, these cultural norms exert an ascending
level of power over that individual, 'whose substance is spirit standing at the
higher level' (para. 28). That is, the most historically proximate 'shape' is in
each case the dominant inﬂuence over the individual's thinking and con-
duct, whereas an older cultural form has to that degree 'descended to the
status of an insigniﬁcant moment', or is 'only a trace'.
8. Conclusion: On the Persisting Externality of Second Nature
I would like to conclude this paper by recapitulating our major claims,
as a prelude to addressing an outstanding question from the last section.
After reviewing the Philosophy of Spirit account of second nature, cen-
tered on the bodily incorporation of norms, we contemplated the 'defe-
tishizing' conception advanced by critical theory. Afterwards, through
our analysis of several recurring expressions, we saw that the PhG
negotiates both conceptions. For natural consciousness both manifestly
(a) identiﬁes with a posited norm it habitually expresses in its thought
and behavior, and (b) mistakes this 'natural notion' for a ﬁrst nature, in
the sense of a given that has not been 'posited'. Finally, our interpreta-
tion of the phrase 'inorganic nature' supplied additional conﬁrmation of
the PhG's essentially defetishizing program, now broadened to embrace a
wider social whole: the exposure of apparent 'immediacies' as historically
evolved and cultural second natures.
Today - or rather in 1807 - Hegel directs his reader to 'take possession'
of her inorganic nature, and hence her entire substantial history.53 Yet until
now, as we observed, this nature has appeared as a given or alien endow-
ment. In the Preface, recall, Hegel states that the 'individual's substance . . .
appears external to him' (para. 28), while, in Observing Reason, it is some-
thing the individual 'comes upon' (para. 305). To return to our question,
then, postponed until now: why should this so-called inorganic nature
appear 'external', at least initially, from the individual's perspective? Why,
more pointedly, should the individual need to repossess her own nature?
If my interpretation thus far is correct, of course, a fully satisfying
answer to this question would amount to resolving a fundamental problem
of Hegel's writings: why should a 'mediated' reality ever falsely appear to
consciousness as something 'immediate'? Why, indeed, must spirit become
'foreign' to itself in order to know itself? Naturally, I will not be dispatching
the larger problem of Hegel's philosophical theodicy in this place.
536
M. A. BECKER

Nevertheless, Hegel does shed some light on our more speciﬁc question,
regarding the 'externality' of inorganic nature, in three passages from the
Preface. In the ﬁrst, he writes that 'the cultural formation of the individual
regarded from his own point of view consists in his acquiring all of this
which is available, in his living oﬀthat inorganic nature and in his taking
possession of it for himself' (para. 28). He adds, in a second passage: 'That
content, which is already what has been thought, is the possession of
individuality [Eigentum der Individualität] [. . . I]t is just the in-itself
which is to be converted into the form of being-for-itself ' (para. 29). And
in a third passage, Hegel clariﬁes, using the same language we have repeat-
edly highlighted, that 'knowing is directed against the notion [Vorstellung]
which has come about through this immediacy, [and] is directed against
this familiarity [Bekanntsein]' (para. 30).
Hegel's object in these three quotations seems to be a two-stage model or
mechanism of self-knowledge. An 'education' that (a) every self implicitly
realizes simply by living in the modern era, or by being brought up to
function passably well in this cultural milieu, is only (b) completed -
however ambiguously - in philosophical self-reﬂection. Yet as we can
now appreciate, this 'self-reﬂection' involves reconstructing one's inorganic
nature - the tissue of spuriously 'familiar' Vorstellungen circulating in the
wider culture - as a developing sequence of increasingly rational ground-
norms or 'concepts'. My interpretation of Hegel's image is that until and
unless one's inorganic nature is 'recollected' and reconceived along these
lines, it will appear to reason as arbitrary: a nature I just happen to have.
Every 'natural notion' strikes consciousness as a 'given'. It will remain a
'mere' second nature for me - something habitually 'familiar' - if it is not
recapitulated as a rational development and thus (truly) made mine. To
employ another Hegelian expression: I attain 'self-cognition' in the 'other-
ness' of my natural Vorstellungen only when I intuit them as more than
simply 'familiar', but as my very own substance - as a 'posit' of that spirit
which I myself am.
Yet here we might insist that this second nature is rational, i.e. really
does meet the criteria of rational adequacy, only if it has surpassed its
internally discordant, self-inverting characteristics. Thus we can now
infer: what is de facto mine is only actively appropriated inasmuch as
it is subjected to a Hegelian form of criticism - when, precisely, 'know-
ing is directed against the notion [Vorstellung] which has come about'
(para. 30). But this means that I cannot 'take possession of' (para. 28)
my second nature, and so 'convert [it] into the form of being-for-itself'
(para. 29), without at the same time 'defetishizing' its appearance as ﬁrst
nature and thus critically transcending it - and in precisely the way that
Hegel urges.54
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
537

Notes
1. For some accounts see the following selection: Khurana 2016, 2018; Lumsden
2012, 2013, 2016; McCumber 1990; Menke 2013; Novakovic 2017; Testa 2009.
2.
Much of this interest appears traceable to John McDowell's (1994) Mind and
World. See Pippin (2005, ch. 9) for a helpful summary and criticism of
McDowell's
account.
More
recently,
Terry
Pinkard's
(2012)
Hegel's
Naturalism can be taken as a late culmination of this literature. In these
cases,
Hegel's
writings
are
conceived
as
a
resource
for
a
revived
Aristotelianism that, it is suggested, remains respectful of both modern
science and the enduring distinction between nature and culture.
3.
This concern begins at the latest with Lukács's (1971a) Theory of the Novel,
and is soon after taken up in Adorno's (2006) 'The Idea of Natural History'.
More recently, Khurana (2016), Menke (2013) and Testa (2007) have empha-
sized this concept's importance for critical theory.
4. See Lumsden 2016 and Khurana 2018, 431.
5. There are suggestive allusions to the place of second nature in the PhG in
Testa (2009, 359), and Lumsden (2016, 75), though no sustained attention.
Exceptions to this neglect include Russon (1997, ch. 4), Whitebook (2008)
and especially Novakovic (2017, ch. 2), which contains an illuminating
treatment of the PhG's 'Bildung' section in light of the second nature theme.
6. Helpful accounts of this section include Inwood 2007, McCumber 1990 and
Novakovic 2017.
7. 'This self-incorporation . . . appears as a repetition of them, and the produc-
tion of habit appears as practice' (§410). Unless otherwise indicated, all
quotations in this section are drawn from the Philosophy of Spirit. 'R'
abbreviates Remark, while 'Z' abbreviates Zusatz.
8. 'The soul is free of them [i.e. sensations], in so far is it is not interested in or
occupied with them', such that 'it is at the same time open to other activity
and occupations' (§410).
9. 'So, if I want to actualize my aims, then I must make my physical body
capable of carrying over this subjectivity into external objectivity. My body is
not by nature ﬁtted for this; on the contrary, it immediately does only what is
appropriate to animal life' (§410 Z). I take this clariﬁcation as evidence that,
at least in this context, 'ﬁrst nature' simply means the 'instinctive bodily
endowment' human beings share with animals. For additional conﬁrmation
that this is the basic meaning of 'ﬁrst nature', see also Hegel 1988, 42.
10.
Hegel (§410 R).
11.
The expressions 'habit' and 'second nature' reappear with these meanings in
the Philosophy of Right (Hegel 2003): 'But if it is simply identical with the
actuality of individuals, the ethical [das Sittliche], as their general mode of
behaviour, appears as custom [Sitte]; and the habit of the ethical appears as
a second nature which takes the place of the original and purely natural will'
(PR: §151). This idea is a focus of Khurana 2018 and Novakovic 2017.
12.
See esp. Lumsden 2016 and Menke 2013.
13.
Novakovic (2017, ch. 1) has defended Hegel's claim that the Sittliche
disposition must be habitual or second natural. See also the description in
Pippin (2005, 199-200).
14.
As Hegel (§410 Z) explains, 'The universal to which the soul relates in habit
is . . . only the abstract universality produced by reﬂection from the repetition
538
M. A. BECKER

of many individualities'. The constitutive heteronomy following from this
defect of 'abstraction' is emphasized in Menke 2013.
15. See Lumsden 2016 for the place of habit in Hegel's view of the breakdown of
a culture.
16.
Here I agree with Novakovic (2017, 65-68) that, for Hegel, habit need not
inevitably decline into something context-insensitive, deadening, unrespon-
sive to novelty and thus a source of human suﬀering. But I nonetheless agree
with Lumsden (2016, 88) that, for Hegel, historically and as a rule, transitions
from one cultural formation to the next have caused this kind of psychic
trauma - and precisely because a form-of-life's 'habituation' cements a deep-
seated identiﬁcation with norms that, in the meantime, may gradually
become unfeasible.
17. I take the expression 'defetishizing critique' from Benhabib (1986, ch. 2). As the
name indicates, this program is epitomized by Marx's treatment of 'commodity
fetishism'.
18. The same use of 'second nature' can be found in, for example, Lukács 1971b, 128.
19. Readers familiar with Adorno's writings will note that, occasionally, 'ﬁrst
nature' also designates the natural drive for self-preservation. Hence Adorno
sometimes claims that our 'second natures' - the putative achievements of
culture - are actually extensions or even intensiﬁcations of 'ﬁrst nature',
inasmuch as they perpetuate the human struggle for survival 'at a higher
level'. To avoid unnecessary confusion, I will leave this valence of ﬁrst nature
undeveloped in this article. See Testa 2007, though, for an illuminating
treatment of the issue in these terms.
20. See Buck-Morss (1979, 52-62) for a helpful discussion of Adorno's use of the
expression 'second nature', which likely owes more to the writings of Lukács
and Walter Benjamin than to Hegel.
21. Menke (2013, 41) does at times seem to read Hegel this way: 'The identity of
the self of habit is imaginary: it has become, has been posited by spirit, and
appears as being or nature.' Of course, in an attenuated sense, habit does
appear 'thing-like' to the self of the Subjective Spirit. However, I am not
certain there is enough evidence in §410 to ascribe to this self a 'mystiﬁed'
relation to its habits - as though this self did not realize its second nature was
at an earlier stage 'posited' by its own activity.
22. Probably the closest Hegel comes to explicitly identifying the 'mystifying'
potential of second nature is in the Philosophy of Right. Here Hegel suggests
that, once the political state is a 'second nature' to its citizens, they become
blinded to its contingency: '[H]abit blinds us to the basis of our entire
existence. It does not occur to someone who walks the streets in safety at
night that this might be otherwise, for this habit of [living in] safety has
become second nature, and we scarcely stop to think that it is solely the eﬀect
of particular institutions' (PR §268 Addition).
23. See again Benhabib 1986, ch. 2. I hasten to add that I am not the ﬁrst to
ascribe a 'defetishizing' program to Hegel's PhG. Benhabib herself emphasizes
such a connection. My contribution, again, is rather to elucidate the unity of
this program with certain key expressions in the PhG that, taken together,
signal a distinctive conception of second nature.
24. See my article 'On Immanent Critique in Hegel's Phenomenology', (Becker
2018) in Hegel Bulletin.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
539

25. Nonetheless, a number of commentators do seem to understand natural
consciousness along these lines. Kenneth Westphal (2009, 6), for example,
strongly implies that these shapes are in the ﬁrst instance philosophies:
'Part of Hegel's genius is his ability to identify the core principles of
philosophical views, to take them absolutely literally, and to state exactly
what follows from them.' For similar attributions, see Siep 2014, 62, and
Förster 2012, 367-368. Even the recent 'neopragmatist' readings defended
in Pinkard 1994 and Brandom 2009 arguably promote a version of this
view, inasmuch as natural consciousness is conceived ﬁrstly as a 'reason
giving practice'.
26. Werner Marx (1975, 3) makes roughly this same distinction: '[N]atural
consciousness "exists" essentially in immediate unity with the total situation
which at any given time dominates and determines it.' By contrast, 'phenom-
enal knowledge is a "qualiﬁed" form of natural consciousness [. . . I]nsofar as
it is an object of presentation, it "presses on" as such, along the [scientiﬁc]
road presented' (1975, 3).
27.
All references to paragraph numbers in parts 4-8 of this article are to the
paragraph
numbers
in
Terry
Pinkard's
2018
translation
of
Die
Phänomenologie des Geistes (Hegel 2018). In this article, I have mostly kept
to Pinkard's translation. Wherever I deviate from it, though, I have included
an explanation. I have also routinely included the original German text,
where relevant, in brackets.
28. One might suppose that Hegel's reference is to the diﬃculty of an individual
directly ascending to Absolute Knowing. But the next sentence strongly
suggests Hegel is referring to the vertigo shared by any shape once it begins
to 'examine' itself: 'The compulsion to accept this unaccustomed attitude and
to transport oneself in that way would be, so it would seem, a violence
imposed on it' (para. 26). Compare the Introduction's similar passage:
'Consciousness therefore suﬀers this violence at its own hands and brings
to ruin its own restricted satisfaction' (para. 80).
29. To my knowledge, Fackenheim (1967, 32-33) was the ﬁrst commentator to
fully appreciate this peculiarity of natural consciousness.
30. Only at the conclusions of Sense-Certainty and Perception does Hegel refer
directly to the philosophical exponents of these shapes. Only then, that is,
does Hegel address the theoretical doctrines based on the foregoing experi-
ences. (See paras 109 and 131. Compare also para. 162 in 'Force and
Understanding'.) But this suggests that even the most patently 'epistemolo-
gical' shapes in the book are essentially orientations, and not the 'philoso-
phies' founded on them. Even more clearly, Stoicism and Skepticism ﬁgure,
not as self-enclosed intellectual frameworks, but as practical life-projects. (See
paras 199 and 205.) Finally, the failures that Hegel chooses to accentuate are
inseparable from those life-projects, the attempt to live out these orientations
coherently. (See paras 201 and 205.)
31. For example, a 'master' deﬁnes and esteems himself in a certain way, which
can be distinguished from the self-conceptions of an ascetic, a scientist, a
hedonist or a political revolutionary. And Hegel attempts to show his reader
how, exactly, each of these character-types, familiar to us both from history
and everyday life, idealizes some particular ground-norm.
32. This thought is expressed very clearly in Neuhouser 2009, esp. 38.
540
M. A. BECKER

33. This, of course, is the basis of Hegel's immanent testing procedure: observing
how a shape attempts - and fails - to enact its ground-norm in a coherent
way. In practically enacting his concept of 'independence', for instance, the
master unavoidably incurs forms of dependence that are strictly speaking
discordant with its (initial) self-conception. On Hegel's account, the failure
of each shape's self-examination yields an 'inversion' of itself - the determi-
nate 'essence' taken up by the succeeding attitude: 'As a result, a new shape of
consciousness comes on the scene for which the essence is something diﬀer-
ent from what was the essence for the preceding shape' (para. 87).
34. Hegel (§410 R). See also the Lectures on the Philosophy of History, where
Hegel connects habit and second nature to the instinctive, unreﬂecting
disposition of ethical life, and at the same time conﬁrms that 'ﬁrst nature'
is the self's animal embodiment: 'Ethical life . . . is the sense of duty (unques-
tioned, unconscious), the substantial law - a "second nature," as it has rightly
been called (since the "ﬁrst nature" of human beings is our immediate animal
being)' (1988, 42).
35. More concretely, and taking the Philosophy of Right at face value, such
dispositions have presumably been 'habituated' both by education and the
more impersonal discipline of civil society. See Khurana 2018, 424-430. In
this article, I will leave the mechanisms of this enculturation indeterminate.
36.
Though beyond the scope of this essay, deepening this continuity would
require showing, in detail, how each of the shapes of natural consciousness
both originates in, while preserving, the animal 'proto-self' described in
Hegel's reﬂections on Life at paras 166-177. This, I take it, is the basic
premise behind the analysis provided in Whitebook (2008, esp. 383), which
treats the struggle-for-recognition as a parable for the transition from 'ﬁrst'
(i.e. instinctive, animal) nature to 'second' (i.e. normative, cultural) nature.
37. I will repeat that the illusory 'ﬁrst nature' evoked here is not to be conﬂated
with the Philosophy of Spirit's narrow version, i.e. the self's instinctive bodily
endowment. To be sure, second nature may deceptively assume this parti-
cular form. (After all, one longstanding ideological argument is that tradi-
tional gender roles are rooted in our 'biological natures'. Indeed, the PhG's
section on Greek Sittlichkeit subverts just such an ideology.) But our thematic
here pertains more broadly to any item, process, or law that, though 'posited'
by human activity, is mistaken for something that 'naturally' obtains inde-
pendently of that activity.
38. This trait is clear enough from the Introduction. But Hegel will also inter-
mittently note in his own voice that a particular shape preserves no memory
of its 'history'. Consider, for example, the opening of 'Reason': 'The con-
sciousness that is this truth has this path behind it and has forgotten it while
it immediately comes on the scene as reason' (para. 233).
39. See Dove (1970, 627-641), for a classic summary and critique of the diﬀering
interpretations of the 'We' problem. At issue here is the question of how
Hegel understands the status of the philosophical observer who 'follows
along' as spirit examines, criticizes and transforms itself.
40. This is Hegel's conception of 'determinate negation': very roughly, his view
that a particular item (a concept, an attitude, a social order, etc.) is only
adequately grasped as the 'result' of another item's dissolution, or inversion.
See para. 79.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
541

41.
In order to ﬂag the systematic meaning of Vorstellung in these contexts, I
have consistently translated it as 'notion'. This decision deviates from
Pinkard's translation, which
- in the
Introduction alone - renders
Vorstellung as 'supposition' (para. 73), 'representation' (para. 74) and 'con-
ception' (para. 78). At the same time, it disrupts an older tradition of using
'notion' to translate Begriﬀ. This was A. V. Miller's (1977) practice, for
example, in his translation. Yet in a note to his translation of the Preface,
Walter Kaufmann (1966, 7-9) already cogently critiqued this practice: 'The
ordinary meaning of Begriﬀis deﬁnitely concept. Because this is one of
Hegel's most characteristic terms . . . some nineteenth-century English trans-
lators felt that a less ordinary term was called for and hit on "notion." This
word is utterly misleading as it suggests vagueness and caprice, while Hegel
takes pains to attack haziness and subjectivity.' I submit, though, that the
associations of 'vagueness and caprice' are exactly what Hegel intends with
the term Vorstellung. (I thank an anonymous reader who pressed for these
clariﬁcations.)
42. Pinkard renders gewohnte Vorstellungen with 'common conceptions'. I have
used 'habitual' to preserve the continuity with Hegel's other discussions of habit.
43. The text preceding this quotation constitutes strong additional evidence that
such 'notions' are in fact the foundational concepts presupposed by natural
consciousness: '[T]he most common form of self-deception and deception of
others is when one presupposes something as well known and then makes
one's peace with it . . . Subject and object, God, nature, understanding,
sensibility, etc., are, as is well known, all unquestioningly laid as foundation
stones which constitute ﬁxed points from which to start and to which to
return' (para. 31).
44. These phrases, of course, are glosses for the 'shapes' that Hegel calls
Perception, Desire, Law-Giving Reason, and the Conscience.
45. In light of 'meta-reﬂections' of this sort, the assimilation of all forms-of-
consciousness - i.e. the shapes Sense-Certainty through Law-Test Reason - to
the mature Hegel's category of 'subjective spirit' becomes particularly proble-
matic. See for example Lukács 1975, 472. In the Philosophy of Spirit, sub-
jective spirit appears to embrace the trans-historical competencies (cognitive
or otherwise) of the human being. Yet on the basis of the cited passage, in the
PhG the very prospect of such a deﬁnitive, epoch-independent catalogue
seems doubtful.
46.
Hegel inserted the last, crucial part of this sentence - 'thus appears external
to him' - while editing the PhG at the end of his life. While Yovel's (2005)
translation includes this phrase, Pinkard's does not.
47. 'Experimenting . . . with each part of its existence and philosophizing about
everything it came across, the ancient course of studies fashioned itself into
an altogether active universality' (para. 33).
48. In any case: every participant in the Western European culture of 1807.
Moreover, the most unthinkingly assimilated Vorstellungen of that era were
the basically Kantian ones Hegel identiﬁes in the Introduction.
49. The self's quasi-libidinal identiﬁcation with norms, we suggested earlier,
explains why it experiences their loss as 'self-loss' on a 'path of despair'.
50. I have altered Pinkard's translation slightly to underscore that these elements
of inorganic nature are ostensibly vorgefundenen, or something consciousness
'comes upon'.
542
M. A. BECKER

51. For a more detailed elaboration of this thought, see Forster 1998, 354.
52. These self-understandings are rational, because they are conceptually articul-
able as normative truth-claims; and they are increasingly so, because each
preserves the 'truth-content' of an earlier, failed self-understanding: '[E]very
result which emerges . . . contains the truth that the previous knowing has
within itself' (para. 87).
53. Förster (2012, 358-362) shows that Hegel took over the 'inheriting'/'taking
possession' distinction from Goethe's Faust I.
54.
See my article 'On Immanent Critique in Hegel's Phenomenology' (Becker
2018), for a detailed justiﬁcation of this inference.
Acknowledgement
I'd like to thank Jay Bernstein and two anonymous reviewers at International
Journal of Philosophical Studies for helpful comments on earlier drafts of this
paper. I'd also like to thank Thomas Khurana for answering questions about his
work, as well as Frederick Neuhouser, Andreja Novakovic and Cæcilie Varslev-
Pedersen, for discussing these ideas with me.
Disclosure statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the author.
References
Adorno, T. 1973. Negative Dialectics. New York: Continuum.
Adorno, T. 2006. "The Idea of Natural-History." In Things Beyond Resemblance,
edited by R. Hullot-Kentor. New York: Columbia University Press.
Becker, M. A. 2018. "On Immanent Critique in Hegel's Phenomenology." Hegel Bulletin.
https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/hegel-bulletin/article/on-immanent-cri
tique-in-hegels-phenomenology/E2FED948046255CEAA18A6B1D4366E0F
Benhabib, S. 1986. Critique, Norm and Utopia: A Study of the Foundations of
Critical Theory. New York: Columbia University Press.
Brandom, R. 2009. Reason in Philosophy: Animating Ideas. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
Buck-Morss, S. 1979. The Origin of Negative Dialectics: Theodor W. Adorno, Walter
Benjamin, and the Frankfurt Institute. New York: Free Press.
Dove, K. R. 1970. "Hegel's Phenomenological Method." Review of Metaphysics 23
(Jun.): 4.
Fackenheim, E. L. 1967. The Religious Dimension in Hegel's Thought. Bloomington:
Indiana University Press.
Förster, E. 2012. The Twenty-Five Years of Philosophy: A Systematic Reconstruction.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Forster, M. N. 1998. Hegel's Idea of a Phenomenology of Spirit. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Hegel, G. W. F. 1988. Introduction to the Philosophy of History. Indianapolis:
Hackett Publishing Company.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
543

Hegel, G. W. F. 2003. Elements of the Philosophy of Right. edited by Allen W. Wood.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hegel, G. W. F. 2007. Philosophy of Mind. edited by Michael Inwood. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Hegel, G. W. F. 2018. Phenomenology of Spirit. Trans. Terry Pinkard. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Inwood, M. J. 2007. A Commentary on Hegel's Philosophy of Mind. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Kaufmann, W. 1966. Hegel: Texts and Commentary. New York: Anchor Books.
Khurana, T. 2016. "The Art of Second Nature: Kant, Schiller, Hegel," Unpublished
Translation
of
"Die
Kunst
Der
Zweiten
Natur:
Zu
Einem
Modernen
KulturbegriﬀNach Kant, Schiller Und Hegel." WestEnd. Neue Zeitschrift Für
Sozialforschung 13: 1.
Khurana, T. 2018. "Politics of Second Nature: On the Democratic Dimension of
Ethical Life." In Philosophie Der Republik, edited by P. Stekeler-Weithofer and B.
Zabel. Tübingen: Mohr.
Lukács, G. 1971a. The Theory of the Novel. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Lukács, G. 1971b. History and Class Consciousness. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Lukács, G. 1975. The Young Hegel: Studies in the Relations between Dialectics and
Economics. London: Merlin Press.
Lumsden, S. 2012. "Habit, Sittlichkeit and Second Nature." Critical Horizons 13:
220-243. doi:10.1558/crit.v13i2.220.
Lumsden, S. 2013. "Between Nature and Spirit: Hegel's Account of Habit." In Essays
on Hegel's Philosophy of Subjective Spirit, edited by D. S. Stern. Albany: State
University of New York Press.
Lumsden, S. 2016. "Second Nature and Historical Change in Hegel's Philosophy of
History." International Journal of Philosophical Studies 24: 74-94. doi:10.1080/
09672559.2015.1111920.
Marx, W. 1975. Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit: A Commentary on the Preface and
Introduction. New York: Harper & Row.
McCumber, J. 1990. "Hegel on Habit." The Owl of Minverva 21 (Spring): 2.
McDowell, J. 1994. Mind and World. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Menke, C. 2013. "Hegel's Theory of Second Nature: The 'Lapse' of Spirit."
Symposium 17 (Spring): 31-49. doi:10.5840/symposium20131713.
Neuhouser, F. 2009. "Desire, Recognition, and the Relation between Bondsman and
Lord." In The Blackwell Guide to Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit, edited by K. R.
Westphal. West Sussex: Blackwell Publishing .
Novakovic, A. 2017. Hegel on Second Nature in Ethical Life. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Pinkard, T. 1994. Hegel's Phenomenology: The Sociality of Reason. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Pinkard, T. 2012. Hegel's Naturalism: Mind, Nature, and the Final Ends of Life.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Pippin, R. 2005. "Leaving Nature Behind, or Two Cheers for Subjectivism: On John
McDowell." In The Persistence of Subjectivity: On the Kantian Aftermath, edited
by R. Pippin. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Russon, J. 1997. The Self and Its Body in Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit. Toronto:
University of Toronto Press.
Siep, L. 2014. Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
544
M. A. BECKER

Testa, I. 2007. "Criticism from within Nature: The Dialectic between First
and Second Nature from McDowell to Adorno." Philosophy & Social Criticism
33: 473-497. doi:10.1177/0191453707077019.
Testa, I. 2009. "Second Nature and Recognition: Hegel and the Social Space."
Critical Horizons 10 (3, Dec.): 341-370. doi:10.1558/crit.v10i3.341.
Westphal, K. 2009. "Hegel's Phenomenological Method." In The Blackwell Guide to
Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit, edited by K. R. Westphal. West Sussex:
Blackwell Publishing.
Whitebook, J. 2008. "First Nature and Second Nature in Hegel and Psychoanalysis."
Constellations 15: 3.
Yovel, Y. 2005. "Translation and Running Commentary." In Hegel's Preface to the
Phenomenology of Spirit. Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
545

