Transactional Analysis Journal
ISSN: 0362-1537 (Print) 2329-5244 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rtaj20
The Existential Phenomenology of Transactional
Analysis
John Nuttall
To cite this article: John Nuttall (2006) The Existential Phenomenology of Transactional
Analysis, Transactional Analysis Journal, 36:3, 214-227, DOI: 10.1177/036215370603600305
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1177/036215370603600305
Published online: 28 Dec 2017.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 576
View related articles 
Citing articles: 4 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rtaj20

The Existential Phenomenology
of Transactional Analysis
John Nuttall
Abstract
Berne (1961/1987)described transactional
analysis as a systematic phenomenology that
incorporates the values ofexistentialism. Al-
though there are few overt references to the
existential school in Berne's popular writ-
ings, it is evident from a number of passages
in his books that he embraced a profoundly
existential-phenomenological attitude in his
approach to psychotherapy. This article dis-
cusses the development and major tenets of
existential phenomenology, their impact on
psychotherapy, and how they can be readily
integrated and recognized within the key
concepts of transactional analysis. For ex-
ample, transactions constitute intersubjec-
tivity, ego states and life positions represent
Being-in-the-world, games manifest inau-
thentic Being or bad faith, and script de-
notesthe existential projectand possibilities-
for-Being-in-the-world. A clinical vignette
helps to synthesize the two approaches and
highlights how each conceptualizes the thera-
peutic relationship. The article concludes
that transactional analysis is a system that
describes human existence at both the ontic
and ontological levels and that it can be
readily construed as embracing the existen-
tial perspective. This may be an attribute of
all major systems of psychotherapy, and,
therefore, psychotherapy integration might
be better achieved by the useof an expanded
and enriched language taken from a range
of such systems.
Transactional analysis was described by its
originator, Eric Berne, as a "systematic phenom-
enology" (1961/1987, p. 270), and, more re-
cently, Clarkson (1992) asserted that it works
"within a humanistic/existential framework of
values" (p. 1). It is generally considered a sys-
tem of therapy that belongs to the humanistic
214
third force in psychology (Maslow, 1962) and,
in this respect, at least, is companion to the
existential therapies developed by Rollo May
and James Bugental. Although some probably
consider it one of the "flashy American cous-
ins" (Yalom, 1980, p. 17), these descriptions
suggest that transactional analysis has, at least
in part, an existential-phenomenologicalunder-
pinning. According to Laing (196011990), "Exis-
tential phenomenology attempts to characterise
the nature ofa person's experience ofhis world
and himself' (p. 17).I believe transactional analy-
sis, more than most therapeutic systems, pro-
vides a lucid and accessible framework for de-
scribing and exploring the character ofhuman
existence at both the individual (ontic) level
and the level ofBeing in general (ontological).
Existential phenomenology, or existential-
ism, is a term that synthesizes two schools of
thought: existential philosophy and phenome-
nological inquiry. Its origins can arguably be
traced to an axial age in the development ofphi-
losophy around the time of the pre-Socratics,
the I Ching, and the Upanishads (Friedman,
1999; Jaspers, 1949/1953). However, its recent
development is more commonly attributed to
the nineteenth century and the works of the
philosophers Seren Kierkegaard and Friedrich
Nietzsche and, in the last century, the works of
Husserl, Heidegger, Sartre, Merleau Ponty, Jas-
pers, and others (Macquarrie, 1972).
Apart from the occasional reference by
Berne to Kierkegaard and May, there are few
places to begin a discussion on the influence of
existentialismon the early development oftrans-
actional analysis (Berne, 1961/1987, p. 84;
1966, pp. 306-311). However, one place might
be Berne's (1972/1992) description ofthe for-
ces ofhuman destiny, which suggests he recog-
nized human existence as a mixture ofexisten-
tial givens and personal agency.
The forces ofhuman destiny are foursome
and fearsome: demonic parental program-
Transactional Analysis Journal

THE EXISTENTIAL PHENOMENOLOGY OF TRANSACTIONAL ANALYSIS
ming, abetted by the inner voice the an-
cients called the Daemon; constructive
parental programming, aided by the thrust
oflife called Phusislong ago; external for-
ces, still called Fate; and independent as-
pirations, for which the ancients had no
human name, since for them such were the
privileges mainly of gods and kings. And
as a result of these forces, there are four
kinds oflife courses, which may be mixed·
and that lead to one or another kind of fi-
naldestiny: scripty, counterscripty, forced,
or independent. (p. 56)
Transactional analysis grew from Berne's
(1977) early studies on intuition and his ability
to identify, experientially, the differentways in-
dividuals cope with these forces. This, in part,
led him to abandon his psychoanalytic training
and develop a new system oftherapy based on
experienced human interaction or transactions.
Such use ofintuition is akin to phenomenology,
which is "a method of investigating the world
in which all prejudice and assumptions are put
aside in order to meet the world directly through
intuition" (du Plock, 1997a, p. 5). This article
reviews, briefly, the development of existen-
tialism and forges integrative links between the
existential school and the core concepts of
transactional analysis. These support the view
of transactional analysis as a systematic phe-
nomenology that can be readily embraced by
those with a substantially existential outlook.
The Development of Existential
Phenomenology
According to Deurzen-Smith (1997), "Exis-
tential thinking is an attempt to think about
everyday human reality in order to make sense
of it" (p. 1). It emerged during the social and
religious turmoil of the European industrial
revolution in the controversial works ofSeren
Kierkegaard and Friedrich Nietzsche. Their
thinking developed into a combined existential
view that as human beings wehave the freedom
and the responsibility to choose our way ofliv-
ing, but we need will and courage to face the
uncertainty, anxiety, and guilt this brings (Mac-
quarrie, 1972). Nietzsche (1883/1961) believed
this condition was life affirming and drove hu-
man aspiration: "My suffering and my pity-
Vol. 36. No.3. July 2006
what ofthem! For do I aspire after happiness?
I aspire after my work" (p. 336). Kierkegaard
(1844/1980), on the other hand, emphasized
the existential dread that accompanies this con-
dition, which, he believed, needs to be toler-
ated, and "whoeverhas learned to be anxious in
the right way has learned the ultimate" (p. 155).
The intellectual base ofphenomenology was
provided by Edmund Husserl, a German mathe-
matician and philosopher. He introduced a way
of investigating how we build reality from ex-
perience by developing Brentano's notion of
intentionality into a principle that explains all
mental experience as being object directed, as
being actively related and connected to the
world around us. He considered intentionality
to have two elements or foci: the noema (object
ofconsciousness), or what is experienced, and
the noesis (act of consciousness), or how the
what is experienced. These can be elucidated
by adopting the phenomenological method, or
reduction, which consists of the three rules of
epoche, description, and equalization. Epoche,
or bracketing, exhorts us to put aside our as-
sumptions, biases, and prejudices about things.
Description urges us to stay with the initial de-
scription of experience rather than to offer
theoretical or speculativeexplanations about it.
Lastly, equalization encourages us to give such
descriptive contents equal value and signifi-
cance. This approachhas been adoptedby exis-
tential therapists as a way ofunderstanding the
client's world with an open mind (Spinelli,
2005).
The person who combined these philosophi-
cal and intellectual elements into a synthesized
"blueprintfor living" (Deurzen-Smith, 1997, p.
34) was Martin Heidegger, Husserl's assistant
at the University of Freiburg. From phenome-
nology he brought"asystematic way oflooking
at human existence" (p. 34) and from existen-
tial philosophy a view about the nature of hu-
man Being. Heidegger (1927/1999) introduced
an ontological concept of human Being he
called Dasein, which is usually translated into
English as "Being-there" (p. 27). It is charac-
terized by the inevitable and unavoidable con-
ditions ofbeing a human being, for which Hei-
degger coined the term "Being-in-the-world"
(p. 78). He described Dasein as being "thrown"
215

JOHN NUlTALL
into the world, ofhaving to cope with the vicis-
situdes of life and human relationships, a gen-
eral state he called "facticity." It is always Mit-
sein or"Being-with" and entangled withothers,
the kind of being that Heidegger described as
"completely fascinated by the 'world' and by
the Dasein-with of Others in the 'they' " (p.
220). He described how this leads us into
mediocrity and everydayness, living our lives
just like the masses, a state he called "fallen-
ness" and "inauthenticity' (p. 220). Heconcep-
tualized existence as intersubjective and con-
textual, with the consequence that Dasein must
care about-that is, be involved with-the
world and others (Cohn, 1997, p. 13). Heideg-
ger (1927/1999) described this as concern for
objects and solicitude for others. These are
manifested ontically in the way individuals
learn to [me-tune, manipulate, or exploit their
environment and relations with others in both
positive and negative ways (pp. 114-30).
Thompson (2004) argues that bothNietzsche
and Heidegger identified the angst that under-
lies inauthentic being, "but Heidegger was
more adept at characterising the precise fea-
tures ofthis dread for what it is, the experience
ofbeing alive" (p. 186). This dread brings Da-
sein to recognize its fallen state and to question
the meaning ofexistence, relationship with oth-
ers, life's incertitude, and the inevitability of
death. May (1958) believed these questions
bring into awareness the prospect ofnonbeing
(a feeling ofnot having substance, identity, and
existence) and cause conflict between Dasein's
developing potential and the security ofits fal-
len state (pp. 51-55). This conflict and its corol-
lary of choice raises the kind of existential
angst Kierkegaard described as "the dizziness
of freedom" (as cited in May, 1958, p. 52). As
Deurzen-Smith (1997) explained, "Ifwe let our
conscience call us out ofthe everyday we shall
feel the pangs of guilt, which is existential
guilt, an indication ofthe ways in which we fall
short ofour destiny" (p. 41). This falling short
is exemplified by our evasion of autonomous,
responsible,
and intimate
interaction with
others and the world. Heidegger (1927/1999)
believed it could be redressed byself-reflection
and by accepting that we are "Being-towards-
death" (p. 294). Accordingly, Deurzen-Smith
216
(1997) asserted that "an acute awareness ofour
human limitations and mortality is therefore the
key to authenticity and with it the key to true
humanity" (p. 39).
Heidegger (1927/1999) identified a number
ofcapacities ofDasein that enable it to manage
its existence (pp. 172-214). First, it is always
mooded or subject to a particular emotional
state; although thiscannot beavoided, it is some-
thing that can be reflected on and managed.
Second, Dasein has the capacity to understand
and reflect on itselfand can develop a vision of
itself in the world. Last, it has the capacity for
discourse or the "articulation ofintelligibility"
(p. 203). The way Dasein brings these constitu-
ents to bear on its throwness, its fallenness, and
its potentiality forms what Heidegger called its
project (Entwurj) or possibilities-for-Being-in-
the-world (p. 185). In other words, these capa-
cities allow us to make sense of our being-in-
the-world in a nominative and concrete way
and to formulate actions and plans for the fu-
ture. Heidegger probably never finished his
exploration ofDasein, but his work formed the
base for other existential philosophers, such as
Sartre and Merleau-Ponty, whom I shall also
consider here (Matthews, 1996).
The Advent of Existential Psychotherapy
Heidegger's ideas impactedprevailing Euro-
pean psychotherapy theory and formed the
foundation of Daseinsanalysis, which was de-
veloped by the Swiss psychiatrists Ludwig
Binswanger and Medard Boss, and of logo-
therapy, which was developed by the Austrian
Viktor Frankl (Deurzen-Smith, 1997). These
ideas were transported to America by Rollo
May in the book Existence (May et al., 1958)
and developed further into existential therapies
by such American proponents as James Bugen-
tal (1981) and Irving Yalom (1980). These pio-
neers believed that psychological health de-
pends on the individual's awareness and ability
to tolerate, or confront, existential anxiety and
guilt. The existential theologian Paul Tillich
(1952) arguedthat confrontationtakes courage,
but from this comes a sense ofautonomy, self-
actualization, and authenticity. The assumption
that human beings aspire naturally to improve-
ment and authentic relationship with the world
Transactional Analysis Journal

THE EXISTENTIAL PHENOMENOLOGY OF TRANSACTIONAL ANALYSIS
is considered a major tenet of American hu-
manistic existentialism (Cooper, 2003). It is
represented by the adoption of Goldstein's
(1939/1995) concepts ofholism and actualiza-
tion by pioneersofhumanistic psychologysuch
as Carl Rogers and Abraham Maslow. Berne
(1947/1971), however, adopted the equivalent
concept ofphysis from Greek philosophy. He
considered it "the growth force of nature" (p.
369), but Clarkson (1992) asserted that "there
is nothing normative about the concept, it is
simply change as flux or state ofbeing" (p. 11).
In An Introduction to Metaphysics, Heidegger
(1935/1987) also referred to physis as such a
"power" (p. 14)and considered its original Greek
meaning to represent Being. He wrote, "Physis
means the emerging and the arising, the spon-
taneous unfolding that lingers" (p. 61). It may
not always be kind, at least to humanity, and as
such would fit comfortably with the existential
approach, which du Plock (1997a) asserted "is
grounded in a view ofthe human being as con-
stantly changing, flexible and always in the pro-
cess ofbecoming" (p. 4). Alongside this, Berne
maintained his belief in Freud's concept of
Thanatos and its manifestation as mortido and
destrudo. In this respect, he is close to agree-
ment with the true existentialist who, Deurzen-
Smith (1997) contended, "is less certain ofhu-
man goodness" (p. 57).
Heidegger(1927/1999) believed that existen-
tial anxiety is denied or avoided by inauthen-
ticity and the "tranquillised self-assurance" of
"theyness" (p. 233). Jean-Paul Sartre (1943/
1991) also postulated a similar, albeit more on-
tic, concept of"bad faith" (p. 50). This charac-
teristic ofhuman Being has been construed by
some existential psychotherapists as the basis
ofpsychological disturbance (Bugental, 1981;
Yalom, 1980). They view psychological dis-
tress, within its cultural and social context, as
an understandable way of dealing with the
anxiety associated with the existential givens of
death, freedom, meaninglessness, and isolation
(Binswanger, 1958; Laing, 1960/1990; Yalom,
1980). In existential therapy, inauthenticity is
explored and reflected on as one way ofBeing-
in-the-world. As Deurzen (1999) asserted, "The
essential nature of Dasein requires us to be as
open to inauthenticity as authenticity" (p. 123).
Vol. 36, No.3. July 2006
Such exploration can, according to the existen-
tial therapist Cannon (1991), "precipitate one
ofthose psychological instants in which a new
choice of a way of being in the world may be
made" (p. 317). In other words, as Thompson
(2004) expresses, "Instead oftrying to flee from
our anxieties by suppressing them we can
choose to listen to what they tell us about our-
selves" (p. 186). The kind of therapeutic rela-
tionship that helps to foster such change is
characterized by what Buber (1970) called an
I-Thou relationship, in which "the secret is to
give oneselffully over to the experience ofthe
meeting with a preparedness to meet the other"
(Deurzen-Smith, 1997, p. 75). The client can
thus move to a position ofliving more authenti-
cally, which is "about following one's own per-
sonal direction within the constraints and limi-
tations of one's existential reality" (Deurzen-
Smith, 1988, p. 53).
The Existential Phenomenology of
Transactional Analysis
Transactional analysis does not provide an
in-depth study of the meaning of Being, but it
does offer a systematic and user-friendly way
ofdescribing psychological disturbance and the
individual's experience of being in the world;
it "places the client-ehoosing, self-determin-
ing and responsible-s-in the centre ofthe thera-
peutic relationship" (Clarkson, 1992, p. 9). It
aims for the client "to move out of script and
gain autonomy" (Stewart & Joines, 1987/1991,
p. 6), with the three qualities ofawareness, spon-
taneity, and the capacity for intimacy (Berne,
1964/1968, p. 161). This is a similar state to
existential authenticity, which Cohn (1997)
asserted is manifested onticallyas "anopenness
to existence, and acceptance ofwhat is 'given'
as well as our freedom to respond to it" (p. 127).
Stewart and Joines (1987/1991) consider
Berne'sapproach to reflect the respect for authen-
ticity and autonomy central to the existential
school and suggest that transactional analysis
avoids the overly optimistic assertion of some
humanistic psychologies that human motivation
naturally leads to growth and positive change.
A flavor of Berne's existential attitude can be
gleaned from his comments about his favorite
card game:
2/7

JOHN NUlTALL
Poker is one of the few really existential
situations left in the world. Now here's
what I mean by existential: Everybody's
on their own. Nobody's going to feel sorry
for you. You're fully responsible for every-
thing you do. Once you put the money in
the pot, that's it, it's in the pot. There's no
copping out. (Berne as cited in Stewart,
1992,p.21)
This is a typical Bernean metaphor, here de-
scribing what existentialists call the facticity
and throwness (i.e., the everyday condition) of
human Being. Such facticity, however, always
brings with it possibilities and the freedom of
choice. This is a source of existential anxiety
and tension between what is and what other-
wise could be, which creates a sense of alone-
ness. Some existentialists might argue that the
poker metaphor places too much emphasis on
our aloneness and ignores Heidegger's concept
ofMitsein mentioned earlier. However, Berne
(1972/1992) affirmed relationship elsewhere,
albeit in distinctly nonexistentialistjargon. He
raised four questions (anxieties) about human
relationship: "How do you say hello? How do
you say hello back? What do you say after you
say hello? and, principally the plaintive query,
what is everybody doing instead of saying
hello?" (p. 4). These simple questions are at the
core ofsuch existential issues as the nature of
existence and how it is bestowed and validated
by others. In Principles ofGroup Treatment,
Berne (1966) wrote,
Insofar as actual living in the world is con-
cerned, transactional analysis shares with
existential analysis a high esteem for and
a keen interest in, the personal qualities of
honesty, integrity, autonomy and authen-
ticity, and their most poignant social mani-
festations in encounter and intimacy. (p.
305)
In the following sections I explore the key
concepts of transactional analysis (Stewart,
1992) and show how they might be readily
integrated with the major tenets of existential
phenomenology. I begin by discussing this is-
sue of relationship and Being-in-the-world-
with-others.
Transactions, Strokes, and Intersubjectivity.
Merleau-Ponty (1962) used the term "intersub-
218
jectivity" to describe how the infant or individ-
ual is, from the beginning, in relationship with
others and the world. His thinking was an ex-
tension of Heidegger's generalized Being-in-
the-world to a more specific question of how
we experienceBeing-in-the-world-with-others.
Diamond (1996) asserted that "intersubjectivity
is a basic condition ofexistence" (p. 310), and
it is from this basic condition of relatedness
with others that the individual builds a sense of
self From a Heideggerian perspective, Groth
(1996) explained, "I regularly come to know
about my existence from others, just as I first
had my existence bestowed on me by another,
the mothering figure of my infancy" (p. 64).
Similarly, the SartreantherapistCannon(199 I)
asserted that such relatedness is the source of
human "valorization" for infants and individu-
als, from which they build their sense of self
and others (p. 316). Crossley(1995) referred to
such early preverbal relatedness as "radical
intersubjectivity," distinguishing it from the
later, more mature and reflective relatedness he
called "egological intersubjectivity" (p. 71).
This condition of relatedness is one of the
core principles oftransactional analysis. When
two people interact, in any way, there is a trans-
action, a stimulus, and a response that signals
recognition. Berne (1972/1992) called these
units ofrecognition "strokes" (p. 23), and stud-
ies have suggested that human beings need
strokes for both mental and physical health
(Spitz, 1945; Steiner, 1971; Stem, 1985/1998).
The way we engage, or not, with others is a fo-
cus in transactional analysis by which the client
comes to recognize the types of encounter in
which strokes are received or given. The inter-
subjective nature of strokes and transactions
can be gleaned from Berne's "TheoryofSocial
Contact" (1961/1987, subsection beginning on
p.77):
A great deal of linguistic, social, and cul-
tural structure revolves around the ques-
tion ofmere recognition: special pronouns,
inflections, gestures, postures, gifts, and
offerings are designed to exhibit recog-
nition ofstatus and person. This ritual may
be typically summarized as follows: (a)
"Hello!" (b) "How are you?" (c) "Warm
enough for you?" (d) "What's new?" (e)
Transactional Analysis Journal

THE EXISTENTIAL PHENOMENOLOGY OF TRANSACTIONAL ANALYSIS
"What else is new?" The implications are:
(a) someone is there; (b) someone with
feelings is there; (C) someone with feelings
and sensations is there; (d) someone with
feelings, sensations and a personality is
there; (e) someone with feelings, sensa-
tions, a personality, and in whom I have
more than a passing interest is there. (p.
79)
In transactional analysis, transactions consti-
tute the intersubjective space and represent
pure intentionality; they have, arguably, both
noematic and noetic dimensions. The noema is
the experienced verbal and behavioral transac-
tion, that is, what is being said or done. The
noesis is how it is experienced, that is, how it is
perceived,judged, understood, or remembered.
This is crucial to understanding the transaction
and differentiating between what Berne called
the overt social transaction and the covert ulter-
ior transaction that is expressed in subtle tone,
attitude, and demeanor and that often repre-
sents the subliminal and genuine meaning of
the communication.
Existentially, transactions represent the way
we show our solicitude for others and how we
"validate each other in the human look or gaze,
by human touch, and in speaking to each other
(or withholding speech)" (Groth, 1996, p. 59).
According to Cohn (1994), this is experienced
in the therapeutic encounterby the way "patient
and therapist always mutually affect each oth-
er" (p. 700), and, as Groth (1996) asserted, "The
unique feature of existential validation is its
equi-mutuality' (p. 59). In transactional analy-
sis, this is optimal when two people transact
without ulterior meaning from the life position
referred to as "I'm OK, You're OK" (Berne,
1972/1992).
LifePositionandEgoStatesasBeing-in-the-
World. The way we relate, or transact, with oth-
ers in our earliest experiences influences the
pattern of relating and our way of being with
others later in life. Diamond (1999) described
how Merleau-Ponty (1964) elucidated the na-
ture of how "there is a profound interpersonal
tie between the child and others, which is
central to the child's emerging experience" (p.
83). From a Sartrean perspective, Barnes (1990)
asserted, "During this time my original project
Vol. 36. No.3, July 2006
is shaped, the fundamental choice ofmy being
is made" (p. 42). In transactional analysis, this
fundamental choice ofbeing is called the exis-
tentiallife position, Berne (1972/1992) posited
four basic life positions, which he considered
to be ''universal among all mankind, because
all mankind nurses at his mother's breast and
gets the message there" (p. 87). However,
Berne also accepted the facticity or throwness
ofindividual being-in-the-world and that "each
person is the product ofa million different mo-
ments, a thousand states of mind, a hundred
adventures, and usually two different parents"
and a "thorough investigation of this position
will reveal many complexities and apparent
contradictions" (p. 87),
Berne believed the infant starts life in an
"I'm OK, You're OK" position, a state similar
to the Sartrean concept ofpure innocence and
intentionality, which Barnes (1990) described
as the "stage I am not aware that I am aware of
the world" (p. 42). The child may shift to one
of the other positions ("I'm Not OK, You're
OK"; "I'm OK, You're Not OK"; or "I'm Not
OK, You're Not OK") when something inter-
rupts the interdependence of the child and its
environment, which at this period is represen-
ted by the mother. Existentially, all the life
positions represent ways in which we are fallen
and reflect our solicitude for others. The three
not-OK positions represent everydayness in
which, as Heidegger (1927/1999) described,
"Dasein is absorbed in the 'they' and is mas-
tered by it" (p. 210). Even the mature mutual
OK position-a conceptual state similar to exis-
tentialauthenticityand reflective consciousness
-is, "existentially ... only a modified way in
which everydayness is seized upon" (p. 224).
Cohn (1994) argued that ''we never meet an
individual patient, we also meet his/her context,
i.e., his/her family, partner, social nexus, etc.
For the existential therapist, there is in fact no
'individual' therapy" (p. 700). Berne (1977)
drew a similar conclusion from his early work
on intuition, from which he developed his con-
cept of ego states. He viewed them as observ-
able and subjectivelyexperiencedstates with "a
consistent pattern of feeling and experience
directly related to a corresponding consistent
pattern of behavior" (Berne, 1966, p. 364).
219

JOHN NUTIALL
Phenomenologically,
they
represent
what
Cooper (2002) suggests are "discreet 'modes'
---eachbasedon a particularself-construct-by
which they [individuals] encounter and experi-
ence the world" (p. 151). Clarkson and Gilbert
(1990) considered them to be "chunks ofpsy-
chic time" that form sets of feelings, attitudes,
and behaviorpatterns that are copied from sig-
nificant others (Parent) or reexperienced from
childhood(Child) or that represent autonomous
responses to current reality (Adult). Existen-
tially, our total being is brought to therapy, and
all our ego states are immanent when we trans-
act with others. The Parent and Child ego states,
althoughthey transcend temporalcontext,should
not be viewed as regressed states but, existen-
tially, as Cohn (1997) suggested, a way in which
"the past . . . is already an aspect of the pres-
ent" (p. 39). The extent to which our Parent
and Child ego states dominate Adult function-
ing will be reflected in our particular way of
being in the world and the degree of authenti-
city or bad faith present. The Parent and Child
ego states, inparticular, manifest the existential
"they" in which "one belongs to the Other one-
self and enhances their power" (Heidegger,
1927/1999, p. 164).
The existentiallifepositionandego statescom-
bine to form a particular way of being, or per-
sonality structure, that can be self-limiting. In
transactional analysis this structure is constitu-
ted by the script matrix and its associated story
for living, the life script (Steiner, 1974/1990).
This seems, inprinciple, similar to what Heideg-
ger (1927/1999) called our "project" (Entwurf)
or possibilities-for-Being-in-the-world (p. 185).
Life Script as the ExistentialProject. Inexis-
tential terms, Dasein is thrown into the world
and encounters a multiplicity ofevents and ex-
periences by which it begins to appreciate the
constant process of change to which it is sub-
ject. Heidegger (1927/1999) considered that as
we build our project, the self becomes ab-
sorbed in the anonymous "they" that "pre-
scribes one's state-of-mind, and determines
what and how one 'sees' " (p. 213). In transac-
tional analysis this equates to a life script
"whichmilitates against people's abilityto take
responsibility for themselves ... and their own
growth and well-being" (Clarkson, 1992, p. 6).
220
Ontically, it represents the peculiar way we
dynamically engineer our being in the world;
we comply, complement, compete, or rebel in
relation to the world. Sartre's (1943/1991) view
was that we seek valorization in this way in our
attempt to be something, to avoid the dread of
being nothing. Being thrown into the world
with little apparent value burdens us with the
responsibility of creating ourselves and some
kind of meaning in life. As a consequence, as
Deurzen-Smith (1997) pointed out, "We rush
into settling for the first character traits, per-
sonality and social roles that are within our
reach" (p. 47) and live in a state ofwhat Sartre
(1943/1991) called "badfaith" (p. 50). In trans-
actional analysis terms, we decide our life posi-
tion, fit a script to early patterns ofrelating, and
get drawn into living out these developments.
Berne (1972/1992) described the script as "a
life plan based on a decision made in child-
hood, reinforced by the parents, justified by
subsequentevents, and culminating in a chosen
alternative" (p. 445). In this sense it is deci-
sional and future oriented and can be changed
in later life upon reflection and by further de-
cisions. Similar to the Sartrean view, Berne
wrote, "Each person designs his own life. Free-
dom gives him the power to carry out his own
designs, and power gives him the freedom to
interfere with the designs of others" (p. 30).
The script influences what Heidegger (1927/
1999) called our "state of mind" (befindlich-
keit) (p. 172), our "how-we-are-ness" with oth-
ers in the world. Berne described scripts as
winning, banal, or hamartic, and they are pro-
jects decided prematurely in what Sartre might
have considered a nonreflective state ofbeing.
Thus, as du Plock (l997b) pointed out, "At
least theoretically, this choice could have been
other, and could, in consequence, have given
rise to a quite different personality structure"
(p. 68). Although transactional analysis practi-
tioners believe scripts have common themes,
there are as many scripts as human beings. On-
tically, the script is an archaic and sedimented
way of being that reflects the way individuals
learned to gain validation from others and that
ends with what they believe they deserve in
life. Ontologically, it is a response to what
Cohn (1997) described as the "conditions of
Transactional Analysis Journal

THE EXISTENTIAL PHENOMENOLOGY OF TRANSACTIONAL ANALYSIS
existence" (p. 125) and represents Dasein's in-
volvement in the world.
Berne believed that script and life position
decisions start at the mother's breast. Similarly,
Merleau-Ponty (1964) argued that infants start
relating to others bymimicking caregivers, that
there is a kind of"ensnaring ofme by the other,
it is the invasion ofme by the other" (p. 145),
and soon after, such relating becomes invested
with intentionality. Bames (1990) offered a
corresponding Sartrean view of the origins of
our project or life script in infancy:
During this time my original project is
shaped, the fundamental choice ofmy be-
ing is made: I choose myselfthrough atti-
tude and action: I vote for my destiny with
my feet and without making rational con-
scious choices. . . . I direct myself to the
things I encounter and I form and develop
patterns of relating that seem most agree-
able or accessible. (p. 42)
As if to describe the development ofthe script
matrix, Bames went on to write, "Normal de-
velopment however takes me ... to the build-
ing of an increasingly fixed image of selfgen-
erated by the totalisation of past experience"
(p. 42). It is only by reflection and awareness
ofour way ofbeing-in-the-world, by examining
our script as it is lived and felt in the present,
that we can expose it as an inauthentic way of
being. The therapeutic process in transactional
analysis aims to help a client reflect on his or
her particular script so that it might be changed
for one that is more spontaneous, intimate, and
existentially advantageous. Thus we move to a
position of release from the premature deci-
sions ofthe script and the false sense ofself at
its foundation. As Bames described it, "I grasp
the fact that I can reshape the givens ofthe past
and that I am obliged to create a self in the
future" (p. 42).
Games and Bad Faith. In Being and Noth-
ingness Sartre (1943/1991) developed a con-
cept of individual inauthenticity that he called
"bad faith" (p. 47). He gave an example ofthis
by describing a sequence of interactions be-
tween a man and woman having a drink to-
gether in a cafe (p. 55). She is aware of the
man's intentions but seems unsure whether to
commit herself. The man puts his hand on hers,
Vol. 36. No.3. July 2006
and she is placed in the position of being in-
vited to respond. However, she refrains from
acknowledging what is happening, detaches
herselffrom the moment, and subtly rejects the
man's advances. According to Sartre, she is in
bad faith. For Sartre, such "patterns of bad
faith" (p. 47) represent ways in which a person
holds on to his or her value as a Being-in-itself,
a fixed character with a history, rather than face
the incertitude and anxiety of the underlying
state ofa Being-for-itself, autonomous, present,
and free ofthe past and the future and therefore
substantially nothing. As Deurzen-Smith (1997)
explained, "We love to act as ifwe are set and
substantial, as ifwe have a certain character, a
certain essence, and a fixed state ofbeing....
It is utterly reassuring to spend our lives in bad
faith, acting at being something definite" (p.
47). In a further example, Sartre asked us "to
consider this waiter in the cafe" whose "behav-
iour seems to us a game" (p. 59), and such pat-
terns of bad faith can be likened to Berne's
concept ofgames (1964/1968).
In transactional analysis, the sequence ofin-
teractions between the man and the woman in
the cafe might be described as a first-degree
game of"Rapo" (Berne, 1966, p. 110), which
is played to validate the existential life position
of "I'm OK, You're Not OK" and that others
(men/women) are not trustworthy. Berne (1972/
1992) described games as "a set of ulterior
transactions, repetitive in nature, with a well-
defined psychological payoff... which means
that the agent pretends to be doing one thing
while he is really doing something else" (p.
23). Individuals play games, out ofawareness,
to reinforce their life script and existential life
position, and they are always played from the
Child or Parent ego state. It is a repetitive way
of affirming our existence in the present in a
form we recognize from the past.
Games are phenomena that have an observ-
able behavioral and transactional sequence;
Berne (1972/1992, p. 24) called this sequence
Formula G, which he presented as follows: Con
+ Gimmick = Response ~ Switch ~ Cross-up
~ Payoff. Applying this to Sartre's story, it
seems the couple had met before and that she
had, perhaps unwittingly, drawn the man into
inviting her out on their first date. Sartre (1943/
221

JOHN NUlTALL
1991) wrote, "She knows very well the inten-
tions which the man . . . cherishes regarding
her" (p. 55). This is her con ("I'm available"),
which hooks into his gimmick ("I can satisfy
you"). The response is that they meet to have a
drink, and the same con and gimmick are
played over again; she places her hand in an
accessible position and he touches it. As Sartre
said, "To leave the hand there is to consent in
herself to flirt" (p. 55). However, at this point
she switches her apparent intentions and ig-
nores his advances or "does not notice because
it happens by chance that she is at this moment
all intellect" (p. 55). For Sartre, the story ends
there, but it is easy to speculate that in such a
situation there would follow a moment of con-
fusion or misunderstanding, which in transac-
tional analysis is called the cross-up. The fmal
stage ofthe game would be manifested by each
party experiencing their particular inauthentic
familiar feeling, or payoff, which in this case
may be something like rejection for the man
and indignation for the woman. In transactional
analysis terms, the social transaction was be-
tween two ostensible Adult ego states, while
the ulterior transaction was between two archaic
ego states (probably Parent and Child) reenact-
ing symbiotic roles that confirm their beliefs
about themselves and others. For Sartre, such
bad faith represents our way ofdealing with the
ambiguity of desiring to be something while
being aware that
we are nothing-or, as
Deurzen-Smith (1997) put it, "Weare nothing
pretending to be something" (p. 47).
In transactional analysis, games are consid-
ered to be short-termbehavioral manifestations
ofthe life script and, in turn, become structural
supports of the script. In the same way, Sartre
presented the vignette just described as a typi-
cal incidental example of bad faith while as-
serting that we all spend much of our time in
such an inauthentic state. In a Sartrean sense,
therefore, both games and scripts represent bad
faith and, from the Heideggerian viewpoint,
they are manifestations ofinauthentic Being-in-
the-world.
A Case Vignette: Peter's
Possibilities-for-Being-in-the-World
Affirming Heidegger's concept of Mitsein,
222
Groth (1996) asserted that one ofthe main fea-
tures ofexistence "is that human beings cannot
exist alone. Human be-ing is existence with
others or coexistence" (p. 59). I present here a
client, Peter, whose existence seemed to be val-
ued only if'he behaved in the way he was valor-
ized in infancy-by not being, as he put it, the
"assertive and free" person he felt he could be
but by being ingratiating and pleasing so that
he did not "disappointsomeone." Peter's moth-
er, whom he loved yet feared, had been domi-
neering and strict. When asked to describe her,
he said, "Mum, well! I always had to do what
she wanted; she was very controlling and had a
look ofwrath that would kill. She never let me
be me." His father, a senior international exec-
utive, was often absent; father was admired and
described as having high expectations of his
third and only male child. The family con-
stantly moved house as his father changedjobs,
and Peter described feelings of not belonging
anywhere as a child. In transactional analysis
terms, Peter's existential life position seemed
to be "I'm Not OK, You're OK," or, more pre-
cisely and precariously, "I'm OK (I can exist,
be assertive, belong, etc.) if I try hard and
please others, who are sometimes OK and
sometimes not OK." Thus, by obeying these
conditions, he managed his relationships and
was able to cope with life. However, when he
did allow himselfto be assertive and free after
his parents' deaths, which culminated in his
coming out as gay, tragedy struck when he con-
tracted HIV. Then, after a number ofyears in a
"perfect relationship," his partner also died,
and Peter found himself homeless. It seemed
that his script payoff of not to exist (be asser-
tive, free, and himself) or belong had come to
fruition. A few months later, he moved location
to find work and succumbed to an acute period
ofdepression and despair that brought him into
psychotherapy.
Peter's conditional lifeposition and scriptmes-
sages constituted, existentially, his inauthentic
being in the world, which was absorbed and
mastered by the "they" ofothers. He had lived
most of his adult life in bad faith, or as Berne
(1972/1992) described it, he had "spent most of
his life deceiving the world, and usually him-
self as well" (p. 31). Sartre (1943/1991) also
Transactional Analysis Journal

THE EXISTENTIAL PHENOMENOLOGY OF TRANSACTIONAL ANALYSIS
wrote, "In bad faith, it is from myselfthat I am
hiding the truth" (p. 42). Indeed, for most ofhis
life, Peterhad warded offdepressive anxiety by
trying hard to please others and be perfect. I
discerned this attitude through my initial intui-
tive feeling of representing some kind of au-
thority figure to whom he had to justify his ac-
tions and decisions and through his bringing a
preset agenda for the initial few sessions. How-
ever, some sessions later, I felt very irritated by
theunrelenting nature ofhis need to please when
even his reflections on this attitude seemed
contrived to present the perfectly balanced in-
dividual he thought I wanted him to be.
This attitude also manifested in his game
playing, which had the motto of"see how hard
I'm trying." His need to try hard and be pleas-
ing seems to have been an admonition from his
father, who set this example but who, according
to Peter, "never quite made the managerial big
league." This game represented the way he
tested his conditional 0 Kness and interpersonal
relations, but, like his father, he never quite
made it, and his ingratiating manner invariably
made relations worse. For example, at one point,
when his boss was away, Peter reorganized the
office; he said, "My boss has reacted to my
overwhelming him. I've been organizingevery-
thing for him and the office and he just doesn't
want it. I'll have to fmd a new job soon, before
I get fired." Times ofdeep crisis, like his infec-
tion with HIV, his boyfriend's death, and his
current depression, showed his way of being-
in-the-world to be ineffective in obtaining sol-
ace or existential advantage. Paradoxically, it
seemed to bring the very rejection from others
and life that he was trying to avoid. As Berne
(1972/1992) wrote about script, "It may not be
what he wants, but it is what he wants it to be"
(p.31).
As the therapy with Peter proceeded, he be-
gan to recognize his script and game playing
for what it was-a kind ofbad faith that hid the
existential anguish ofbeing assertive and free
and the corollary, as Peterreported, of"respon-
sibility, rejection, and being misunderstood."In
transactional analysis terms, such internal diffi-
culty is conceptualized in terms of impasses,
that is, conflicts between Parent admonitions
and Child desires originating at different levels
Vol. 36. No.3. July 2006
of development. Maintaining the stability of
such impasses may divert considerable psychic
energy from more creative use and may be the
source of serious psychological disturbance.
However, such stability is precarious in an un-
stable world; we get ill, we lose our jobs, others
let us down or die. When impasses are unpre-
dictably destabilized by life events, we usually
react with neurotic or even psychotic distur-
bance. But this too is in bad faith, for what this
avoids is confrontation with deeper existential
angst and guilt associated with the question, "If
I am not this person who tries hard to please in
order to be me and belong, who am I? What
otherwise could I be?" Sartre referred to this as
the condemnation of freedom, the realization
that I need not be my past nor, right now, am I
my future. This burdens us with the responsi-
bility of fmding meaning in life and, for Peter,
it manifested in his fear of making decisions
about the future-for example, where to live-
in case he made disadvantageous choices.
Milton (1997) argued that the existential ap-
proach is particularly relevant to people with
HIV because the four givens as elaborated by
Yalom (1980) of"death, freedom, isolation and
meaninglessness permeate the experience of
living with HIV" (p. 44). In Peter's case, the
recent death of his loved ones and the start of
antiviral therapy were all reminders ofhis fac-
ticity (Shelby, 1995), which his conditional
OKness had failed to mediate. As therapy gent-
ly brought more awareness ofhis life position
and script, he was confronted with these funda-
mental givens and other possibilities-for-being-
in-the-world. This awareness made him anxious
and he asked, "How can I get rid ofthese feel-
ings ofconfusion? I feel so aimless, lonely, and
scared." I could offer him no comfort, only the
reflection that these seemed quite justified feel-
ings given his situation and that his game of
"see how hard I'mtrying" seemed an attempt to
avoid them. This was illustrative of his bad
faith, and at this point he seemed to recognize
the sense of "not-Being-its-self' (Heidegger,
1927/1999, p. 220) that underpinned his life
script and game playing.
As the therapy progressed, the therapeutic
relationshipseemed less inauthenticand, at times,
very real and mutual, with a shared recognition
223

JOHN NUTTALL
of Peter's existential anxiety as this was also
evoked in me. As his script became clearer to
him he felt anxious about finding some kind of
meaning for the future, but he realized this
could only be found by a selfthat was autono-
mous and able to react spontaneously and inti-
mately with its environment. I think this was
exemplified by the final session as he began to
let go ofhis symbiotic attachment to his absent
loved ones. He said, "I'd like to learn more
about me and understand life. There's some-
thing beautiful about life and living things. I've
decided where to move, and I've dumped many
of the things I've collected over the years. I'm
selling some, I'll leave some precious things
with my sister, and some things I'm taking with
me." I think this represented the start ofPeter's
move from a historicallysedimented selfto one
more spontaneous and authentic in its relations
with the world.
The Therapeutic Approach in Transactional
Analysis and Existential Therapy
A final point about Peter's case is worth
elaborating under this heading. Throughout the
therapy, I was aware that the depressive anxiety
that Peterinitiallypresented and experiencedat
stages of his therapy originated from his par-
ticular ontic impasse and precarious life script.
However, I also considered that his anxiety, in
the context of his existential predicament,
resembled the kind ofanguish, angst, and guilt
we all face when we become aware that we are
not substantive beings, when one's script is
challenged and the underlying Being is feared
as nothingness, a nonbeing. This was confusing
for Peter, who had never experienced affirma-
tion ofhis "me" from his parents, but this was
existential anxiety from which he could not es-
cape. I saw my function as encouraging explora-
tion of his script but also as giving support
while witnessing the deconstruction ofhis ego
states he feared and the deep anxiety this
evoked. As Kirkland-Handley (2002) writes in
his outstanding review of existential anxiety,
"Anxiety is educative: although we cannot avoid
it, if we can embrace it, we are freed to move
forward and actualise our possibilities" (p. 182).
Peter's main problem was the conviction with
which he believed his script and the substantive
224
sense ofselfthis afforded him. When he finally
gave up this idealistic construct, he began to
recognize his inner aspirations and experienced
a sense of spontaneity that could only have
come from awareness ofhis own freedom.
This brings me to the role ofthe therapeutic
relationship in transactional analysis and exis-
tential therapy. Existential therapy privileges
the real or I-Thou relationship expounded by
Buber (1970). Clarkson (1995) wrote, "Genu-
ine well-judged use ofthe I-You relationship is
probably one of the most difficult forms of
psychotherapeutic relating" (p. 15) and is re-
flected in genuine mutuality between therapist
and client. Deurzen-Smith (1990) exhorted the
existential therapist to "have a flexible attitude
towards therapeutic style" (p. 160), which "fol-
lows a conversational pattern" in which "issues
are considered and explored in dialogue" (p'
161). In this there is the adoption of the phe-
nomenological imperative to value and under-
stand the client's experience from the client's
perspective. Heideggerdescribedphenomenol-
ogy as letting "that which shows itself be seen
from itselfin the very way in which it shows it-
self' (p. 58). This is not unlike Berne's (19721
1992) concept of"thinking Martian" (p. 100),
which is the innocent way the transactional
analysis therapist understands the subjective
meaning of the client's material. In transac-
tional analysis this is fostered by the therapist
relating from the "I'm OK, You're OK" life
position, within which a variety of interven-
tions can be used. As Clarkson and Gilbert
(1990) pointed out, "The adoption ofanyone
attitude . . . is anathema to an approach which
values uniqueness and difference, and requires
from the therapist range and flexibility in ap-
proach" (p. 213).
Perhaps there is one difference in these two
approaches, one that concerns the imperative
for change. Deurzen-Smith (1990) argued, "The
existential therapist resists the temptation to
change the client" (p. 161). In contrast, in one
keynote address Berne said, "How to Cure the
Client. That's the only paper worth writing if
you're really going to do your job" (as cited in
Lee, 2002, p. 137). However, in practice, as
with existential therapy, this is achieved pri-
marily by the client and not the therapist, as
Transactional Analysis Journal

THE EXISTENTIAL PHENOMENOlOGY OF TRANSACTIONAL ANALYSIS
Berne (1972/1992) pointed out: "At a certain
point . . . he is capable of breaking out of his
script entirely and putting his own show on the
road, with new characters, new roles and a new
plot and payoff" (p. 362).
Conclusion
May (1969) wrote, "Existentialism is not a
system oftherapy but an attitude towards ther-
apy. The term demarcates an attitude, an ap-
proach to human beings, rather than a school or
group" (p. 15). It is an attitude that might date
back to the ancient philosophers, but as Tillich
(as cited in May, 1969) observed, it has had
"an astonishing victory in the twentieth cen-
tury" (p. 13) with the developmental work of
Heidegger, Sartre, Merleau-Ponty, and others,
and has been transported into psychotherapyby
a number of clinicians from a wide range of
therapeutic backgrounds (Cooper, 2003).
Berne also developed his ideas during this
time, and although some see their origin in his
psychoanalytic training, he expounded an ap-
proach to psychotherapy that embraced the
existential-phenomenological view. However,
as Moja-Strasser (2002) asserts, "There is no
specific model that can be defined as existential
as existential therapists work in a variety of
ways" (p. 135); there are, therefore, no set
theories or clinical techniques with which trans-
actionalanalysis can be directly compared. The
existential approach is based in philosophy,
and it is thus only possible to look for compari-
sons and similarities at the notional level to
show how transactional analysis can be con-
strued to embrace the existential perspective.
Yalom(1970) describedBerne's"use ofarrest-
ing, lucid terminology" as "a significant contri-
bution to the field" (p. 453). Berne avoidedjar-
gon and the somewhat esoteric language used
by existentialists, but, nevertheless, I think it is
possible to construe Berne's ideas in the same
wayasDeurzen-Smith (1997) construed Heideg-
ger: "His observations of the human mode of
being in the world sketch out a blueprint for
what it means to be a person" (p. 39).
Transactional analysis sees psychological
disturbance as a way ofdealing with the throw-
ness ofBeing-in-the-world and therefore as his-
toricallyand culturallycontextualand ubiquitous.
Vol. 36. No.3. July 2006
Berne described scripts as being winning, ba-
nal, or hamartic, and we all have scripts. He
talked of games having degrees of intensity,
and we all play games. In this sense, transac-
tional analysis constitutesan ontological frame-
work for human Being as well as a systematic
way ofunderstanding the ontic experience ofa
single human being. And it is important to re-
member that transactional analysis, and cer-
tainly Berne's original formulation, is based on
the appreciation and investigation of the indi-
vidual's experience of and encounter with the
world and others. This is understood only by
empathic and phenomenological investigation
ofthe client's particularexperience and adapta-
tion to life's events and givens. The basic
method of transactional analysis is therefore
phenomenological,
while
its philosophical
position is existential. Notwithstanding this
foundation, transactional analysis has devel-
oped and embraced a host of therapeutic sys-
tems and techniques (Tudor, 2002) that offer
the client the range and flexibility in approach
referred to by Clarkson and Gilbert (1990).
It could be argued that all the major schools
ofpsychotherapy have phenomenological-based
structures that constitute both ontological and
ontic descriptions ofbeing. Both Rogers's and
Freud's metapsychologies arguably represent
the kind ofblueprint to which Deurzen-Smith
referred. These might be considered different
viewsofthe noematic core (Husserl, 1913/1931)
ofhuman psychology or approximations ofthe
truth or reality ofpsychological makeup (Col-
lier, 1994). Such perspectives suggest that vari-
ous therapeuticsystemssimplyuse differentlang-
uages to describe the same psychological phe-
nomenon; I have explored this principle in rela-
tion to transactional analysis elsewhere (Nuttall,
1999, 2003). This does not necessarily point to
the need for apsychotherapeutic Esperanto, the
difficulties of which have been discussed by
others (e.g., Messer, 1992). However, it does
suggest that different therapeutic approaches
might be reconciled by contributing to an ex-
panded, enriched vocabulary that we could all
learn. Equally, we may find that one system--
transactional analysis,perhaps-is alreadyflex-
ible enough to accommodate ideas from a range
ofphilosophical and epistemological schools.
225

JOHN NUTIALL
John Nuttall is a lecturer in integrative
psychotherapy at Regent's College and the
University ofGreenwich in London and chair
ofWest London Centre for Counselling. He is
also an accreditedpsychotherapist, a certified
management consultant, and a chartered mar-
keter. He has written widely on management
and psychotherapy and has a master's degree
and an advanced diploma in psychotherapy.
His doctoral studies focused on the process of
personalpsychotherapyintegration. He can be
reached at 6 Vaughan Ave., London, W60XS,
UnitedKingdom;e-mail:johnnuttall@tinyworld.
co.uk.
REFERENCES
Barnes, H. (1990). Sartre and psychology: Reviewofexis-
tential psychology and psychiatry. Seattle, WA: Asso-
ciation of Existential Psychology and Psychiatry.
Berne, E. (1966). Principles of group treatment. New
York: Grove Press.
Berne, E. (1968). Games people play: The psychology of
human relationships. London: Penguin. (Original work
published 1964)
Berne, E. (1971). A layman's guide topsychiatry andpsy-
choanalysis. London: Penguin. (Original work pub-
lished 1947 as The mind in action)
Berne, E. (1977). Intuition and ego states: The origins of
transactional analysis (P. McConnick, Ed.). San Fran-
cisco: TA Press.
Berne, E. (1987). Transactional analysis in psycho-
therapy: A systematic individualand socialpsychiatry.
New York: Ballantine Books. (Original work published
1961)
Berne, E. (1992). What do you say after you say hello?:
The psychology of human destiny. London: Corgi
Books. (Original work published 1972)
Binswanger, L. (1958). The existential analysis school of
thought. In R. May, E. Angel, & H. F. Ellenberger
(Eds.), Existence: A new dimension in psychiatry and
psychology (pp. 191-213). New York: Basic Books.
Buber, M. (1970). I and thou. Edinburgh: T. Clark.
Bugental, J. F. T. (1981). Thesearchforauthenticity. New
York: Irvington Publishers.
Cannon, B. (1991). Sartre and psychoanalysis: An exis-
tentialist challenge to clinical metatheory. Lawrence,
KS: University ofKansasPress.
Clarkson, P. (1992). Transactional analysis psycho-
therapy: An integrated approach. London: Routledge.
Clarkson, P. (1995). The therapeutic relationship in psy-
choanalysis, counselling psychology and psychother-
apy. London: Whurr.
Clarkson, P., & Gilbert, M. (1990). Transactional analysis.
In W. Dryden (Ed.), Individual therapy: A handbook
(pp. 199-225). Milton Keynes, England: Open Univer-
sity Press.
Cohn, H. (1994). What is existential psychotherapy? Bri-
tish Journal ofPsychiatry, 165, 699-701.
226
Cohn, H. (1997). Existential thought and therapeutic
practice-An introduction toexistentialpsychotherapy.
London: Sage.
Collier, A. (1994). Critical realism: An introduction to
Roy Bhaskar's philosophy. London: Verso.
Cooper, M. (2002). Towards a phenomenological poly-
psychism. In S. du Plock (Ed.), Further existential
challenges to psychotherapeutic theory and practice
(pp. 147-153). London: Societyfor Existential Analysis.
Cooper, M. (2003). Existential therapies. London: Sage.
Crossley, N. (1995). Intersubjectivity: Thefabric ofsocial
becoming. London: Sage.
Deurzen, E. van (1999). Heidegger's challenge ofauthen-
ticity. Journal of the Society ofExistential Analysis,
10(1),115-125.
Deurzen-Smith, E. van (1988). Existential counselling in
practice. London: Sage.
Deurzen-Smith, E. van (1990). Existential therapy. In W.
Dryden (Ed.), Individual therapy: A handbook (pp.
149-74). Milton Keynes, England: Open University
Press.
Deurzen-Smith, E. van (1997). Everyday mysteries: Exis-
tential dimensions ofpsychotherapy. London: Rout-
ledge.
Diamond, N. (1996). Can we speak ofinternal and exter-
nal reality? Group Analysis, 29, 303-317.
Diamond, N. (1999). The child's relations with others.
Journal ofthe Society ofExistential Analysis, 10(2).
du Plock, S. (1997a). Introduction. In S. du Plock (Ed.),
Case studies in existentialpsychotherapy and counsel-
ling (pp. 1-11). Chichester, England: Wiley.
du Plock, S. (1997b). Sexual misconceptions: A critiqueof
gay affirmative therapy and some thoughts on an exis-
tential-phenomenological theory of sexual orientation.
Journal of the Society of Existential Analysis, 8(2),
56-71.
Friedman. M. (1999). The worlds ofexistentialism. Am-
hurst, NY: Humanity Books.
Goldstein, K. (1995). The organism. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press. (Original work published 1939)
Groth, M. (1996). Existential therapy on Heideggerian
principles.
Martin
Heidegger
and
psychotherapy.
Journal of the Society for Existential Analysis, 8(1),
57-75.
Heidegger, M. (1987). An introduction to metaphysics (R.
Manheim, Trans.). New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press. (Original work published 1935)
Heidegger, M. (1999). Being and time (1. Macquarrie & E.
Robinson, Trans.). Oxford: Blackwell. (Original work
published 1927)
Husserl, E. (1931). Ideas (I. B. Gibson, Trans.). London:
Allen & Unwin. (Original work published 1913)
Jaspers, K. (1953). The origin and goal of history (M.
Bullock, Trans.). New Haven: Yale University Press.
(Original work published 1949)
Kierkegaard, S. (1980). The concept of anxiety (R.
Thomte, Trans.). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press. (Original work published 1844)
Kirkland-Handley, N. (2002). Existential anxiety. In S. du
Plock (Ed.), Further existential challenges to psycho-
therapeutic theory andpractice(pp. 167-188). London:
Society for Existential Analysis.
Transactional Analysis Journal

THE EXISTENTIAL PHENOMENOLOGY OF TRANSACTIONAL ANALYSIS
Laing, R. D. (1990). The divided self: An existentialstudy
insanity and madness. London: Penguin Books. (Origi-
nal work published 1960)
Lee, A. (2002). The one-session cure: On becoming a
non-smoker. In K.Tudor(Ed.), Transactional analysis
approaches to brief therapy (pp. 137-194). London:
Sage.
Macquarrie, J. (1972). Existentialism: An introduction,
guide and assessment. London: Penguin Books.
Maslow, A. H. (1962). Towards a psychology ofbeing.
Princeton, NJ: van Nostrand.
Matthews, E. (1996). Twentieth century French philoso-
phy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
May, R. (1958). Contributions of existential psycho-
therapy. In R May, E. Angel, & H. F. Ellenberger
(Eds.), Existence: A new dimension in psychiatry and
psychology (pp. 37-91). New York: Basic Books.
May, R. (1969). The emergence ofexistential psychology.
In R. May (Ed.), Existential psychology. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
May, R, Angel, E., & Ellenberger, H. F. (Eds.). (1958).
Existence: A new dimension in psychiatry and psychol-
ogy. New York: Basic Books.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1962). Phenomenology ofperception
(C. Smith, Trans.). London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
(Original work published 1945)
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1964). Theprimacyofperception (W.
Cobb, Trans.). Evanston, IL: Northwestern University
Press.
Messer, S. B. (1992). A critical analysis ofthe beliefstruc-
tures in integrative and eclectic psychotherapy. In 1. C.
Norcross & M. R. Goldfried (Eds.), A handbook of
psychotherapy integration (pp. 130-167). New York:
Basic Books.
Milton, M. (1997). Roberto: Living with HIV. In S. du
Plock (Ed.), Case studies in existentialpsychotherapy
and counselling (pp. 42-58). Chichester, England:
Wiley.
Moja-Strasser, L.(2002). The phenomenology oflistening
and the importance of silence. In S. du Plock (Ed.),
Further existential challenges to psychotherapeutic
theory and practice (pp. 135-146). London: Society of
Existential Analysis.
Nietzsche, F. (1961). Thus spake Zarathustra (W. Kauf-
mann & R. 1. Hollingdale, Trans.). Harmondsworth,
England: Penguin. (Original work published 1883)
Vol. 36, No.3. July 2006
Nuttall, J. (1999). Games: A behavioural manifestation of
projective identification. Psychodynamic Counselling,
5(3),339-356.
Nuttall,1. (2003). Script analysis and change in the Rosar-
ium Philosophorum. Transactional Analysis Journal.
33, 231-245.
Sartre,J. P. (1991). Being and nothingness. An essay on
phenomenological ontology (H. E. Barnes, Trans.).
London: Routledge. (Original work published 1943)
Shelby, D. H. (1995). People with HIV and those who
care for them. New York: Harrington Park Press.
Spinelli, E. (2005). The interpreted world-An introduc-
tion tophenomenologicalpsychology (2nded.). London:
Sage.
Spitz, R. (1945). Hospitalism: An inquiry into the genesis
ofpsychiatric conditions in early childhood. In O. Feni-
chel et al. (Eds.), Thepsychoanalyticstudy ofthe child
(Vol. I, pp. 53-74). New York: International Universi-
ties Press.
Steiner, C. (1971). The stroke economy. Transactional
Analysis Journal, 1(3),9-15.
Steiner, C. (1990). Scriptspeople live: Transactionalanaly-
sis oflife scripts. New York: Grove Weidenfeld. (Origi-
nal work published 1974)
Stern, D. (1998). The interpersonal world ofthe infant: A
viewfrom psychoanalysis and developmentalpsychol-
ogy. London: Karnac. (Original work published 1985)
Stewart, I. (1992). Eric Berne. London: Sage.
Stewart, I., & Joines, V. (1991). TA today: A new intro-
duction to transactional analysis. Nottingham, Eng-
land, and Chapel Hill, NC: Lifespace Publishing.
(Original work published 1987)
Thompson, G. (2004). Postmodernismand psychoanalysis:
A Heideggerian critique of postmodernist malaise and
the question ofauthenticity. In 1. Reppen, 1. Tucker, &
M. A. Schulman (Eds.), Way beyond Freud (pp. 173-
202). London: Open Gate Press.
Tillich, P. (1952). The courage to be. New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press.
Tudor, K. (Ed.). (2002). Transactional analysis ap-
proaches to brieftherapy. London: Sage.
Yalom, I. (1970). The theory and practice ofgroup psy-
chotherapy. New York: Basic Books.
Yalom, I. (1980). Existential psychotherapy. New York:
Basic Books.
227

