Philosophical Explorations
An International Journal for the Philosophy of Mind and Action
ISSN: 1386-9795 (Print) 1741-5918 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rpex20
Conscious thinking and cognitive
phenomenology: topics, views and future
developments
Marta Jorba & Dermot Moran
To cite this article: Marta Jorba & Dermot Moran (2016) Conscious thinking and cognitive
phenomenology: topics, views and future developments, Philosophical Explorations, 19:2,
95-113, DOI: 10.1080/13869795.2016.1176230
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13869795.2016.1176230
Published online: 11 Aug 2016.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 3554
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 4 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rpex20

This paper is part of the special issue "Conscious Thinking and Cognitive Phenomenology"
guest edited by Marta Jorba and Dermot Moran
Conscious thinking and cognitive phenomenology: topics, views and
future developments
Marta Jorbaa∗and Dermot Moranb
aDepartment of Philosophy, University of Girona, Girona, Spain; bSchool of Philosophy, University
College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland
(Received 4 April 2016; ﬁnal version received 4 April 2016)
This introduction presents a state of the art of philosophical research on cognitive
phenomenology and its relation to the nature of conscious thinking more generally.
We ﬁrstly introduce the question of cognitive phenomenology, the motivation for the
debate, and situate the discussion within the ﬁelds of philosophy (analytic
and
phenomenological
traditions), cognitive psychology and
consciousness studies.
Secondly, we review the main research on the question, which we argue has so far
situated
the
cognitive
phenomenology debate around the following topics and
arguments: phenomenal contrast, epistemic arguments and challenges, introspection,
ontology
and temporal character, intentionality, inner speech, agency, holistic
perspective, categorical perception, value, and phenomenological description. Thirdly,
we suggest future developments by pointing to four questions that can be explored in
relation to
the cognitive phenomenology discussion: the self and self-awareness,
attention, emotions and general theories of consciousness. We
ﬁnalise by
brieﬂy
presenting the six
articles of this Special Issue, which engage with some of the
topics mentioned and contribute to enlarge the discussion by connecting it to different
areas of philosophical investigation.
Keywords: phenomenal character; thought; cognitive experience; consciousness; inner
speech; agency; perceptual experience
What is the nature of conscious cognition or conscious thinking? What is it like to undergo
an experience of thinking? What does it feel like? Does it have a "raw feel"? Or a kind of
cognitive colouring of its own distinct from any accompanying emotional feeling? Is that
intuitive sense of experiencing a sensation or something else? In recent years, the question
of the experiential or phenomenal character of conscious thought, what has been generally
called "cognitive phenomenology" has gained an important place within analytic philos-
ophy of mind and also within recent discussion in phenomenology. The main questions
in the debate include: does conscious thought have a proprietary phenomenal character,
that is, does it have its own speciﬁc cognitive "phenomenology"?1 Or can the phenomenal
character of occurrent, conscious, cognitive episodes be explained solely in terms of more
familiar kinds of phenomenal experiences - such as sensory, perceptual or emotional
experiences (assuming that their phenomenality has been more fully limned)? Does con-
scious cognition (whose precise varieties also need to be carefully identiﬁed and disambig-
uated) have its own dedicated form of phenomenality or does that phenomenality reduce to
the phenomenality of the accompanying sensuous or emotional states? If conscious
# 2016 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
∗Corresponding author. Email: jorba.marta@gmail.com
Philosophical Explorations, 2016
Vol. 19, No. 2, 95-113, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13869795.2016.1176230

cognitive experiences have their own peculiar phenomenology - how can it be character-
ised? Does it simply reduce to the experiences of attentiveness, voluntary control, reﬂective
awareness, and so on, or are other experiences involved?
Needless to say, this area of research is divided between defenders and deniers of cog-
nitive phenomenology, and arguments on both sides have been presented and discussed
although often without taking great care to give ﬁne-grained account of precisely what,
for example, sensory or sensuous phenomenality means. There is often a rather general
assumption that speaking of the phenomenology of cognitive experiences is somehow
doing something that is close to the hearts of classic phenomenologists. And this raises
an added question, therefore, whether the tradition of phenomenology has anything particu-
larly relevant to contribute to the current debates concerning the phenomenality of cogni-
tion ("cognitive phenomenology" au sens courant).
The importance of these debates concerning cognition and its purported phenomenality
can be seen in relation to various facts. Firstly, the claim that cognition has its own unique
phenomenality questions various fundamental assumptions current in consciousness
research, given that investigations on the phenomenal character or what-it-is-likeness of
experience (Nagel 1974) are normally centred in the domain of sensations and perceptions,
sometimes extending it also to bodily experiences, emotions or agency, but not speciﬁcally
to experiences of thinking per se. Precisely because phenomenality has too readily been
assumed to have a sensuous character, general theories of consciousness continue to be for-
mulated at the expense precisely of excluding cognitive experiences. But, if it turns out, on
the other hand, that there is a speciﬁc or proprietary phenomenal character of thought, how
does this discovery in itself inﬂuence current theories of (phenomenal) consciousness? For
a long time, for instance, the exercise of cognition has been regarded as something that can
be replicated by machines and computers, but if it is has its own peculiar phenomenality,
does this not complicate debates about computation and artiﬁcial intelligence?
Secondly, the puzzles about the nature, role and efﬁcacy of consciousness, creating the
so-called "hard problem" of consciousness, have been mainly treated in regard primarily to
perceptual experiences. It is worth asking, then: how does cognitive phenomenology
modify the characterisation of such puzzles? Do the same puzzles arise for conscious
thought or cognitive experiences? Is conscious thought just another part of the easy pro-
blems of consciousness, related to informational processes and intentionality (Chalmers
1996)? If a defence of a speciﬁc cognitive phenomenology succeeds, it seems that the
hard problem cannot be readily separated from the easy problems, or it might turn out
that there are no easy problems of consciousness after all (Shields 2011).
Thirdly, investigating the character of the experiences of thought or thinking may very
well modify established conceptions concerning the nature of conscious thought generally
and in relation to other features exhibited by thought, such as intentionality, agency, ration-
ality, etc. In this sense, the exploration of cognitive phenomenology might cast doubt, for
instance, on those views of the mind that seek to sharply separate intentionality and
phenomenal consciousness (see Horgan and Tienson (2002) and Montague (2010) for
explanation). In general, thus, what is at stake is a fundamental questioning of assumed
uses of "phenomenal character" as restricted to sensations and perceptual experiences
and, thus, of our overall conception of the reach and nature of phenomenal consciousness.
Earlier debates concerning the phenomenal character of experiences (closely tied to parallel
debates concerning the existence of "qualia" and the "ﬁrst-person" character of conscious
experiences) tended to start from rather narrow premises and unexamined assumptions con-
cerning phenomenality, one which restricted all phenomenology to a felt sensuousness.
96
Marta Jorba and Dermot Moran

The discussion of cognitive phenomenology contributes to various ﬁelds of philosophi-
cal and more broadly cognitive science research. Within philosophy, both analytic philos-
ophy of mind and the tradition of phenomenology, as philosophical traditions and
methodologies, can help shedding light on the topic, with the challenge of ﬁnding
common grounds for debate beyond particular approaches and interests. Over and above
the philosophical arena, cognitive phenomenology can become relevant for interdisciplin-
ary research on consciousness and investigations on cognitive psychology, thus enriching
those disciplines with different perspectives. In this way, cognitive phenomenology appears
as a fruitful ﬁeld of research with relevant connections in philosophical and empirical
researches.
It is the aim of this Special Issue to contribute to enlarge the debate on cognitive phe-
nomenology by presenting six articles that engage with the present discussion and also
focus on some underexplored questions, including some reference to the history of the
topic in the modern philosophical tradition. In this Introduction, we present an overview
of the current state of the art on cognitive phenomenology and conscious thought, situating
the topic in different ﬁelds of research. Then we contribute with a presentation of the main
topics and views, and suggest new paths for future research and development. In the last
section we introduce the contributed papers with a brief summary.
1.
Conscious thinking: an underexplored domain?
What is the nature of conscious cognition or conscious thinking? Different answers have
been given, at least, in three areas: philosophy, cognitive psychology and consciousness
studies. Let us brieﬂy present how conscious thought is treated in those three areas.
Within philosophy, two domains have been separately examined in philosophy of mind
and phenomenology: the nature of consciousness and the nature of cognition or thought.
What is the relation between them? One connection that has been established between cog-
nition and consciousness appears when cognition is connected to perceptual experience. In
this area, there is discussion concerning the question of the cognitive penetrability of per-
ceptual experience, and also on what is the relation of justiﬁcation between perceptual
experience and cognition, among other topics. These issues, however, are more concerned
with the nature of perception and perceptual experiences, and the inﬂuence of thought on
them, than with the nature of cognition or conscious cognition per se.
At the same time, one might feel perplexed with the title of this section that states that
conscious thinking or cognition is a rather unattended or unexplored phenomenon, given
that, at least since Descartes' reﬂections on thinking and the self, considerations of con-
scious thinking have been quite at the centre of philosophical theorisation. The phenomen-
ological tradition, beginning with Brentano and Husserl, has also discussed the nature of
conscious awareness. These classical phenomenologists, however, have mainly focused
their analysis on perceptual experiences and many other sorts of experiences - imagination,
emotions, memory, and so on - without attending primarily to the structures of the experi-
ence of thinking as such (although both Brentano and Husserl have much to say about the
nature and structure of judgement, it has not been primarily interrogated as a speciﬁcally
conscious activity where the modality of its phenomenality is regarded as playing an essen-
tial role).
Moreover, it should be noted that the concepts of "consciousness" and "thought" have
not retained a univocal meaning through history, and knowledge of the changes and of the
evolution of these concepts might help shed light on the situation of cognitive phenomen-
ology as the debate emerged in the last decade of the twentieth century (see Bayne and
Conscious Thinking and Cognitive Phenomenology
97

Montague (2011) and Siewert (2011) for a history of the question). Jansen's contribution to
the issue offers historical insights for the contemporary debate, by highlighting some
aspects of Kant's and Husserl's accounts on thinking.
Within the analytical philosophical tradition, the contemporary debate on cognitive phe-
nomenology began in the 1990s, and an important contribution to this was Goldman's
(1993), who did not preclude the idea of there being experiential or qualitative aspects of
thoughts:
The terms qualia and qualitative are sometimes restricted to sensations (percepts and somatic
feelings), but we should not allow this to preclude the possibility of other mental events
(beliefs, thoughts, etc.) having a phenomenological or experiential dimension. (Goldman
1993, 24)
This paper was followed by a response from Lormand (1996), who posited a quartet of
phenomenal states that did not, however, include thought. A view in support of Goldman's
insight was put forward by Strawson in the ﬁrst edition of Mental Reality (1994), where he
argues for the reality of cognitive experience presenting the much discussed case of the
experience of understanding or coming-to-understand. In the same decade, Siewert
(1998) also talks about sudden realisations or "insights" as thoughts for which no
sensory elements might explain their phenomenal character. Of course, there is a much
older debate in European philosophy (found for instance in Bergson (1946) or Lonergan
(1992)) concerning the nature of intuition, including the intuitive grasp of cognitive
states and their contents and objects (see Rooth and Rowbottom (2014) for a contemporary
overview on intuitions), as well as discussions about the nature of insight and speciﬁcally
the kind of moment of immediate understanding often described as the "Eureka" experi-
ence, "aha" moment or just as "insight".
Goldman, Strawson, Siewert and others were the main precursors of the contemporary
debate on cognitive phenomenology, which started to establish itself in the ﬁeld philosophy
of mind after that decade. Several works argued in favour of cognitive phenomenology in
the beginning of our century (Horgan and Tienson 2002; Loar 2003; Pitt 2004; Graham,
Horgan, and Tienson 2007, among others) but it was not until 2011 that a whole edited
volume dedicated to the question was ﬁrst published with the title Cognitive Phenomenol-
ogy, edited Bayne and Montague (2011). More recently, a second edited volume by Breyer
and Gutland (2016), The Phenomenology of Thinking: Philosophical Investigations into the
Character of Cognitive Experiences addresses the cognitive phenomenology debate in the
interface between analytic and phenomenological traditions in philosophy. The reasons for
this revival are varied, but it may have been partially due to the proposals of various models
of consciousness as higher-or-same order monitoring of mental states (as Prinz 2011 notes)
and, certainly, to the interest in forms of intentionality as phenomenal intentionality in
which intentionality is grounded in phenomenality (Kriegel 2014). The research in cogni-
tive phenomenology was one aspect that paved the way for a new approach to the mind that
countered functionalist and representationalist views.
It is useful to brieﬂy highlight the situation in cognitive psychology and consciousness
studies more generally. Within cognitive psychology, there is a well-established division
between unconscious and conscious thoughts on the basis of two different cognitive
systems or processes that underlie thinking (Frankish 2011): System 1 involves forms or
reasoning that are automatic, intuitive, and mostly unconscious; and System 2 gives rise
to forms of reasoning that are controlled, reﬂective and generally conscious. Research on
conscious thought or cognition, thus, normally appeals to controlled and reﬂective forms
98
Marta Jorba and Dermot Moran

of thinking, or even attentive thinking (Dijksterhuis and Nordgren 2006), somehow assum-
ing that the conscious aspect of thought is thereby fully considered. But is the consciousness
involved in conscious thought adequately described and explained by just appealing to
attention, control, or reﬂection? Whereas sometimes these notions appear jointly in the
characterisation of conscious thought, speciﬁc philosophical reﬂection should be able to
distinguish and treat them separately and in relation to the (phenomenally) conscious char-
acter of thought. As another side of the same coin, much research on the area seems to be
mainly focused on unconscious thought or cognition (Kihlstrom 2013), thereby leaving the
connection to consciousness unattended.
One might think that the proper ﬁeld of enquiry concerning the conscious character of
thought is consciousness studies, given that thought is one mode or capacity within the
mind. But the situation within consciousness studies does not give grounds for optimism:
most research on consciousness is normally carried out in domains other than thought or
cognition. Both scientiﬁc and philosophical theories of consciousness tend mainly to
focus on sensory and perceptual experience, or even emotional, bodily experiences and
action (Velmans and Schneider 2007; Block 2009; Van Gulick 2014), proposing general
accounts of consciousness that normally do not have thought or cognition as its main expla-
nandum. At most, theories that relate thought or cognition with consciousness characterise
thought as a form of access consciousness (Block 1995), namely, a kind of consciousness
(questioned by some as such, though) responsible for the information poised for the rational
control of thought and action. As a symptom of the weak sense in which access conscious-
ness is a form of consciousness, we can see that Block (2007) himself later prefers to talk
about 'cognitive access'.
As we have seen, the domain of conscious thought or cognition and its phenomenal
character remains overlooked in cognitive psychology due to the dominant assumption
that the conscious aspect is already explained by appeals to control, reﬂection or attention,
and overlooked in interdisciplinary consciousness studies due to the latter's focus on other
domains of experience. In philosophy, the renewed interest in consciousness that began in
the 1990s posed the question on cognitive phenomenology and its connection to conscious
thought and started to build this new ﬁeld of research within philosophy of mind and
phenomenology.
2.
Topics and views
This section will present the current state of the art of the cognitive phenomenology discus-
sion, highlighting those elements and aspects that contribute to characterise the nature of
conscious thought and thinking more generally. The debate on cognitive phenomenology
has so far been situated around the following arguments and topics: phenomenal contrast,
epistemic arguments and challenges, introspection, ontology and temporal character, inten-
tionality, inner speech, agency, holistic perspective, categorical perception, value, and phe-
nomenological description.
Two main arguments that have guided the discussion situate experience and introspec-
tive awareness at the basis: the phenomenal contrast argument and the epistemic argument.
Accounts drawing on phenomenal contrast present real cases or thought experiments with
two different scenarios in which it is hypothesised that several elements remain constant
while in one scenario there is a fact that could not obtain unless we postulate the existence
of cognitive phenomenology (Kriegel 2006). The fact that is present in one scenario but not
in another is, for example, understanding a certain sentence in natural language (Husserl
1970; Strawson [1994] 2010), for instance an ambiguous sentence (Siewert 1998), intuiting
Conscious Thinking and Cognitive Phenomenology
99

a mathematical proof (Chudnoff 2015), or presenting hypothetical cases of sudden realis-
ations of zombies that lack sensory, emotional or algedonic (i.e. open to pain or pleasure)
phenomenology (Kriegel 2015). The fact that is presented as relevant in one scenario but
not the other is precisely what constitutes the issue at stake, in the sense that the question
is whether it is explained appealing to cognitive phenomenology or not. Detractors of this
kind of argument have argued that there is a contrast but it is not phenomenal, that the
method in itself is questionable (Koksvik 2015), that other kinds of phenomenology
sufﬁce for explaining away such contrast (Carruthers and Veillet 2011; Prinz 2011; Robin-
son 2011; Tye and Wright 2011), or that zombie phenomenal contrast scenarios for cogni-
tive phenomenology are not imaginable (Pautz 2013). A variation of phenomenal contrast
argument is the case of phenomenal comparison (Graham, Horgan, and Tienson 2009),
where instead of varying just an element in the contrast, there is an overall variation of
all the elements except from some feature that is common to both scenarios. The idea is
that this common feature is the feature that accounts for the experience and the one that
makes a constitutive contribution to phenomenology (Hopp 2016). In general, phenomenal
contrast arguments try to motivate cognitive phenomenology views by appealing to experi-
enced or felt differences accessible by introspection, that is, appealing to the subject's own
experiences when presented with the cases described.
Within the domain of our capacity to experience certain relevant features, we ﬁnd epis-
temic arguments, which have also been at the core of the cognitive phenomenology debate.
Their main idea is that phenomenal character has a certain special character or role when it
comes to our epistemic capabilities. Pitt (2004) presents the most discussed epistemic argu-
ment for knowledge of content of our thoughts, in which he argues that in order to accom-
plish certain cognitive functions - distinguish between thoughts and other kinds of mental
states, distinguish the thought that p from the thought that q, and identify the thought that p
as the thought it is - we need to postulate a proprietary, distinctive and individuative cog-
nitive phenomenology (for each function we can perform, respectively). This epistemic
argument has been contested by a number of authors, arguing that there are alternative
accounts of knowledge of thought contents (Levine 2011; Tye and Wright 2011), and so
that postulation of cognitive phenomenology is not necessary (see also Pitt 2011 for
responses to these objections).
Still within epistemology and in relation to the metaphysics of mind, some authors have
engaged with the epistemic challenges that have been associated with consciousness: the
explanatory gap (Levine 1983), the knowledge argument (Jackson 1982) and zombie scen-
arios (Kirk 1974; Chalmers 1996). As Bayne and Montague (2011) note, two questions are
relevant here: do these kinds of puzzles also arise for conscious thought? And more funda-
mentally, do these challenges function as criteria or markers for phenomenal conscious-
ness? Regarding the explanatory gap, Carruthers and Veillet (2011) argue against
cognitive phenomenology based on the argument that there is no explanatory gap for
thought, given that inverted-experience scenarios are not conceivable. On the other side,
Kriegel (2015) presents the conceivability of a creature whose life is exhausted by intellec-
tual of cognitive activities, and argues that this leads to an explanatory gap. Carruthers and
Veillet's argument has also been resisted by McClelland (2016) on the basis of the idea that
invertibility is not a condition for phenomenality. On the side of the knowledge argument,
Goldman (1993) presents an analogy with the colour case by suggesting that someone who
never experienced propositional attitudes of doubt or disappointment, for instance, would
learn something new when ﬁrst undergoing such experience. However, Bayne (manuscript)
considers the possibility of the knowledge argument for thought very difﬁcult. Also, Goff
(2012), based on rule-following considerations, argues that cognitive phenomenology
100
Marta Jorba and Dermot Moran

poses a new hard problem for physicalism. Finally, are zombie scenarios possible for
thought? Horgan (2011) argues for the conceivability of cognitive zombies, that is, crea-
tures that share with us sensory but not cognitive phenomenology, and so defends the exist-
ence of cognitive phenomenology. However, Carruthers and Veillet (2011) also raise doubts
on the conceivability of a cognitive zombie by claiming that it is not clear whether the
zombies' deﬁcits are that their concepts are incapable of making a causal or a constitutive
contribution to their phenomenology, a distinction they regard as relevant for the
discussion.
Going further into the ﬁeld of epistemology, the debate on cognitive phenomenology
has been highlighted as also important for deciding the epistemic role of consciousness
in justifying belief. Whereas there is an extensive discussion on how perceptual experiences
may justify beliefs and thoughts, the parallel or similar question has not been equally treated
within the speciﬁc domain of cognition. In particular, considerations arise as to whether
non-perceptual consciousness or, speciﬁcally, cognitive experiences, may also play a role
in the epistemic justiﬁcation and knowledge (Chudnoff 2011; Smithies 2013). Dorsch
(this issue) develops the claim that the phenomenal character of judgemental thoughts
marks them as having a certain rational role and as providing epistemic reasons. He thus
contributes to the connection between phenomenal consciousness and (epistemic) ration-
ality more broadly.
Many of the arguments exposed so far, especially phenomenal contrast and epistemic
arguments, but also accounts of the epistemic role of cognitive phenomenology, normally
rely in some way or another on certain assumptions concerning the functioning of intro-
spection, given that they presuppose we have certain direct or special access to our episodes
of thinking, be it their contents or attitudes. In this sense, the discussion on cognitive phe-
nomenology has certainly raised questions in relation to introspection. Many authors have
seen the disagreement in the cognitive phenomenology as a disagreement as to what intro-
spection reveals (Schwitzgebel 2008; Spener 2011): defenders or cognitive phenomenology
afﬁrm, and opponents deny, the existence of cognitive phenomenology on an introspective
basis. Since the beginning of the debate, many authors have directly appealed to what intro-
spection reveals to them (Goldman 1993; Lormand 1996; Horgan and Tienson 2002; Car-
ruthers and Veillet 2011; Prinz 2011). This has contributed to evidence for the unreliability
of introspection (Schwitzgebel 2008) and has raised scepticism as to whether the cognitive
phenomenology debate can be solved appealing solely to introspection (Chudnoff 2015,
among others) and has added more suspicions to older doubts regarding introspective
methods (Smith and Thomasson 2005). Of course, as with the term "phenomenology"
itself, a lot depends here on how introspection is to be understood. Classical phenomenol-
ogists of the Husserlian kind were never happy to describe their understanding of conscious
awareness or reﬂective access as "introspection" that was already being promoted as a
speciﬁc method in empirical psychology at the time (by Titchener among others). The invo-
cation of introspection without further speciﬁcation can hardly be used as a ground for
resisting the efﬁcacy of cognitive phenomenology, since it is very much the question of
the character of carrying out of this kind of cognitive awareness that itself is at stake in
the discussion. Much of the scepticism concerning introspection, then, is simply begging
the question. One either attributes too much or too little to introspection, thereby assuming
either way some form of cognitive phenomenology belonging to it. One cannot invoke the
concept of introspection to clarify issues in cognitive phenomenology (for or against)
without begging the question because one is assuming that introspection has itself no cog-
nitive phenomenology and hence that already assumes a position on the discussion.
Conscious Thinking and Cognitive Phenomenology
101

The presentation of the debate so far has highlighted the fact that motivating cognitive
differences in experience has been a central attempt to defend cognitive phenomenology
(both for phenomenal contrast and epistemic arguments), together with epistemic chal-
lenges generally attributed to experience and appealings to introspective evidence. But
we also ﬁnd many other arguments in the ﬁeld that attempt to provide reasoning beyond
the ﬁeld of introspection, such as: the ontological argument, arguments based on intention-
ality, inner speech, agency, the holistic character of certain elements of experience, categ-
orical perception or value.
Ontology, and in particular the temporal character of experience, has been seen as a
promising ﬁeld of research. Tye and Wright (2011), following Soteriou (2007, 2009) and
Geach (1957), speciﬁcally raise the question of the temporal character of thought. They
argue that thoughts, in contrast with other kinds of experiences, do not have the required
ontological proﬁle (a processive character) to be part of the stream of consciousness and
so to be the bearers of cognitive phenomenology. This argument raises issues concerning
the metaphysics of the constituents of stream of consciousness such as their temporal
proﬁle. It has been discussed in detail by Chudnoff (2015), who argues that the fact that
consciousness is stream-like is compatible with denying that all experiences persist proces-
sively, and by Jorba (2015), who examines the notion of "processive character" at stake and
argues that a reconstructed version of the ontological argument succeeds for some cognitive
episodes but fails with others and that, contrary to what it may seem, this ﬁts well with cog-
nitive phenomenology views.
Given the fact that cognitive mental episodes or experiences of thinking are about
something, that is, they exhibit intentionality, the topic of cognitive phenomenology has
also had impact on accounts of intentionality or its elements, in various ways. The relation
between intentionality and consciousness has been extensively treated for the perceptual
domain (Block 1996; Tye 1995), but remains relatively underexplored for the cognitive
ﬁeld. Several questions arise in this area, such as which is the relation between intentional
and phenomenal properties in thought, or the relation between conscious cognitive inten-
tional content and unconscious cognitive content. Many authors accept the existence of
unconscious intentionality, but the presence of such a domain remains problematic for pro-
ponents of the phenomenal intentionality programme, who nevertheless have proposed
different accounts (Searle 1989; Loar 2003; Strawson 2008; Kriegel 2011, Pitt Manuscript,
Forthcoming). Phenomenal intentionality is understood as a kind of intentionality that pre-
sents a tight connection with phenomenal consciousness, to be speciﬁed in various distinct
claims (Siewert 1998; Loar 2003; for more details, see Kriegel 2014). Some authors argue
for the general claim that some intentional content is determined by phenomenology alone
(Pitt 2009; Strawson 2008), and others also include cognitive phenomenology as a particu-
lar instance of the view (Farkas 2008; Horgan and Tienson 2002 - see (Bailey and Richards
2014) for arguments against Horgan and Tienson's account). Also within this area, different
accounts of the intentionality of thought and language have dealt with the so-called Frege
cases, which, for the case of language, involve sentences of the form "a is b", where "a" and
"b" are supposed to be co-referential singular terms yet different in cognitive value. Volto-
lini (this issue) addresses Frege-style cases in relation to the cognitive phenomenology
debate, arguing, against Kriegel (2011), that these cases cannot be accounted for in terms
of a difference in cognitive phenomenology, although knowing that such objects are the
same involves an "aha" experience endowed with a proprietary phenomenology.
Within the domain of intentionality, it is common to divide the content/object side from
the act/attitude side. Debates on the content side have also involved the discussion on the
particularity of perception (Smith 2011; Montague 2011) and cognition (Smith 2016), that
102
Marta Jorba and Dermot Moran

is, the problem of how does the particularity of an individual ("this-ness") appear in con-
sciousness (perceptual or cognitive, respectively). Both mentioned authors argue that this
might be a route to recognise cognitive phenomenology besides sensory or perceptual
one (see Strawson 2008 and Montague 2015 for accounts on the relation between cognitive
phenomenology and representational content). Some other authors have also focused on the
side of attitudes or acts. This is the case of Brown (2007), who argues that there is an associ-
ated feeling in judging, the feeling of conviction, for example (reprising the discussions
concerning the "feeling" of conviction or certainty found in Mill and other so-called "psy-
chologistic" logicians in the nineteenth century and vigorously attacked by Husserl in his
Logical Investigations). This is also the case of Klausen, who presents the view that prop-
ositional attitudes have a speciﬁc phenomenal character (2008), excluding mental states
such as beliefs (2013). In a similar way, Jorba (2016) extends Pitt's epistemic argument
to cognitive attitudes, defending a speciﬁc attitudinal cognitive phenomenology. Views
on the contrary have been put forward by Prinz (2007, 2011) and Robinson (2005,
2011), for example, who argue that what accounts for attitudinal phenomenology are the
phenomenology of desire and doubt, and/or some forms of emotions and epistemic feelings
such as curiosity, novelty or confusion.
An old and pervasive question relating to cognitive experiences and conscious thinking
in general is the relation of thought to language. This topic has been discussed from mul-
tiple angles and perspectives, but it receives an interesting treatment in the cognitive phe-
nomenology debate, namely: the question of the connection between conscious thought and
so-called inner speech or silent speech. While opponents of cognitive phenomenology tend
to appeal to inner speech as the sensory phenomenon present in most conscious thinking
and (at least partially) responsible for its phenomenology (Robinson 2005; Prinz 2011;
Tye and Wright 2011), some other authors have argued that certain accounts of inner
speech might be more aligned with cognitive phenomenology views than it seems (Jorba
and Vicente 2014). Most of our thinking involves words or images, but forms of non-lin-
guistic and non-imagistic thought have also been examined. In fact, the debate on imageless
thought carried out by psychologists at the beginning of the twentieth century (Woodworth
1906) remerges in the contemporary scene under new guises. This is the case of Lohmar's
(2016) phenomenological analysis of non-linguistic systems of representation, where he
explores, often with reference to the character of non-linguistic animal cognition, the
idea that language is just one of the various possible ways to express our thought. In an
empirically informed way, Hurlburt and Akther (2008) present the experience of unsymbo-
lised thinking through the Descriptive Sampling Experience (DES) method, arguing for the
existence of a differentiated and explicit experience without words or images. This phenom-
enon, however, has been questioned on the basis of possible confabulation from the side of
subjects (Engelbert and Carruthers 2011), appealing to masking effects of the tools used in
the experiment (Tye and Wright 2011), or arguing that unsymbolised thinking is not, after
all, devoid of sensory/perceptual representations (Byrne 2011; and see (Hurlburt 2011) for a
defence of the phenomenon). Vicente and Martı´nez-Manrique (this issue) take up the
phenomenon of unsymbolised thinking and propose an explanation of its origin that is con-
tinuous with the activity of inner speech.
Another prominent aspect of conscious thinking in general is its agential character,
namely, the fact that some conscious thinking can be considered an activity or a mental
action (O'Brien and Soteriou 2009). In this area, the question arises as to how to character-
ise this agential aspect of conscious thinking and what implications this has for the meta-
physics and epistemology of consciousness (see (Soteriou 2013) for a detailed
exploration of the role of mental agency in conscious thinking). One particular question
Conscious Thinking and Cognitive Phenomenology
103

arising in this respect, speciﬁcally, is whether there is a sense of agency in conscious think-
ing and how this purported sense should be described and explained. Horgan (2011), for
example, presents "a guide for the perplexed" where he examines a path from agentive phe-
nomenology - the what-it's-likeness of experiencing one's behaviour as one's own actions
- to cognitive phenomenology through the characterisation of partial zombies. Two articles
in this issue also contribute to exploring the connection between conscious thought and the
sense of agency. On the one hand, Jansen tackles the question of agentive phenomenology
from the perspective of both Kant and Husserl. On the other hand, Vicente and Martı´nez-
Manrique present their account of unsymbolised thinking as capable of explaining the sense
of agency that some conscious thinking exhibits.
If we shift focus from single cognitive experiences to a broader domain that considers
several mental states together, that is, if we take a holistic perspective, we might ﬁnd
another strand of argumentation related to the phenomenal character of conscious
thought. Nes (2012), for instance, argues that conceptual content makes a constitutive con-
tribution to phenomenology by constituting its thematic unity, namely, a unity among the
sensory, cognitive and affective states associated with it. Chudnoff (2013) argues that a
mathematical thought is experienced in a way that depends on the holistic cognitive experi-
ence the subject has when grasping a mathematical proof. In the same line of thought, Nes
(2016) also examines the what-it's-likeness of inferences in phenomenal consciousness.
Also, Jorba (2016), drawing on Husserlian insights, takes a holistic perspective on cognitive
experiences by presenting the horizon of possibilities that is open by episodes of thinking
and argues that it is an instance of cognitive phenomenology. Similarly, Hopp (2016) exam-
ines "horizons" and "empty intentions" - those intentions that, according to Husserl, point
towards some of the experiences that would present the same thing from another perspec-
tive or focus on another aspect, and which also count as part of our cognitive
phenomenology.
Beside the domain of cognition, there may be other areas of the mind in which it seems
reasonable to ﬁnd cognitive states or elements with phenomenal character. Bayne and Mon-
tague (2011) highlight the domain of categorical perception, emotion and epistemic feel-
ings (we treat the latter two below). Within perception, there has been considerable
discussion on the question of whether only low-level perceptual properties (colour,
shape, movement, etc.) or whether also high-level ones (being a tree, etc.) are represented
in perceptual experience (Siegel 2010). This topic can be seen as continuous with the cog-
nitive phenomenology debate (Bayne 2009), insofar as one of the issues at stake is whether
conceptual representation has a phenomenology, no matter whether it appears in perception,
cognition or other domains. Contributing to this, Chudnoff (2016) has recently presented
the question on whether moral perceptions, that is, seeing that someone is wrongfully treat-
ing an animal, have to be considered high-level perceptions or rather instances of intellec-
tual intuition. He argues that these cases are sometimes cognitive and examples of low-level
intuition, thus construing an argument for cognitive phenomenology views.
The connection between value and conscious thought is already suggested by Siewert
(1998) and, developing in this direction, Strawson (2011) constructs a modus tollens argu-
ment from interestingness of life or experience: if cognitive experiences did not exist life
would be boring; life is not boring, so cognitive experiences exist (see Kriegel 2015 for
a similar formulation of the argument). Chudnoff (2015) argues there is a gap in this argu-
ment and proposes to close it adding some premises on the differences in value, in order to
present an argument in favour of cognitive phenomenology.
Some of the mentioned works explore the character of experiences of thinking, besides
the discussion on the existence or not of a phenomenal character speciﬁc to thought, thus
104
Marta Jorba and Dermot Moran

contributing to a phenomenological description of different types of cognitive experiences,
in the sense of the philosophical tradition beginning with Husserl. It is worth noting that
Husserl and others speciﬁcally use verbal nouns to describe actively conscious acts-of-
experiencing, for example, "Erfahren", "Warnehmen," "Denken," "Urteilen" (experien-
cing, perceiving, thinking, judging), rather than the abstract nouns that pick out the
states of experience, perception, and so forth. In German, and in English, "thought" can
signify the act or process of thinking or the objective thought (for which Husserl and
Frege will use the term "der Gedanke", what is thought). Within phenomenological descrip-
tions, it is worth mentioning Smith's (2011) examination of three types of consciously
thinking, classiﬁed according to the kind of object they are directed at: thinking
about what one is seeing, everyday thinking about current events, and thinking about
abstract objects. Smith's aim is to outline the key structures of consciousness in an
experience of consciously thinking, analysing structural modal features of them such as
intentionality, phenomenal character, inner and reﬂexive awareness, spatiotemporality or
embodiment. Crowell (2016), relying on Heidegger, presents a phenomenology of
thinking as a way of being in which meaning is experienced as at issue. Speciﬁcally think-
ing about philosophical problems might be another type of activity worth of inquiry and
with ancient roots in the history of philosophy; a recent discussion on the character of
philosophical thinking is carried out by Bernet (2016). Another detailed instance of
phenomenological description is Kriegel's (2016) characterisation of the activity of
making a judgment that p, where he presents a Ramsey sentence of twenty-three phenom-
enological platitudes about what it is like to make a judgment, based on considerations from
Bolzano.
3.
Future developments
Whereas there is some work done in most of the topics and areas mentioned above, there are
also less-developed questions that appear in the horizon for further research on cognitive
phenomenology and conscious thinking. We will mention four of them, based on the fact
that a few works have initiate new paths, even if there are not extensive treatments on
the questions yet: the self and self-awareness, attention, emotions, and general theories
of consciousness.
First, we ﬁnd the connection of cognitive phenomenology with self-awareness or the
self. If "self-awareness" is interpreted as awareness of our thoughts, the question turns
somehow into the familiar issue of investigating the conscious character of thought or think-
ing, but if "self-awareness" refers to the self or subject as such, then one could envisage
interesting connections with the cognitive phenomenology debate. Phenomenologists
have emphasised that thoughts are not just experienced by me but are also experienced
as "mine". They have the character of "mineness". Indeed, it seems there can be pathologi-
cal cases, for example, in schizophrenia, where subjects can no longer identify their occur-
rent mental experiences as their own thoughts, and have hallucinations of other people
speaking to them or "hear" voices. The speciﬁc mineness of my own thought (and associ-
ated pathologies) is a crucial phenomenon that is all but ignored in the literature on cogni-
tive phenomenology to date. Jansen and Guillot (this issue) examine one aspect in this line
of research. Jansen examines Kant's account of what it is like for me to be aware of myself
as thinker and Guillot investigates the nature of the self-concept and argues that it is a kind
of phenomenal concept whose phenomenal basis lies in cognitive phenomenology. This
piece thus also originally brings phenomenal concepts into the debate, which opens a fruit-
ful avenue of research.
Conscious Thinking and Cognitive Phenomenology
105

As a second area of future development we ﬁnd the topic of attention. Extensive
research has been done on the psychology of attention in perceptual experiences and
action, but the area remains underdeveloped with respect to cognitive experiences. The con-
nection between attention and phenomenal consciousness has been explored in the sense in
which the phenomenal character can be modulated by attention, or discussing whether
attention is necessary or sufﬁcient for consciousness. But how does attention work in con-
scious thinking and how should we characterise the role of attention in cognitive experi-
ences? Already in 1891, Stout (1891) argued that an important job for a theory of
attention was to explain its role in reﬂective thought, and Husserl (1970) considers that
the concept of attention applies both to sensibility and thinking. His manuscripts on
attention have now been published allowing for more intensive research in this area
(Husserl 2004). Contemporarily, Peacocke (1998), for example, distinguishes between
the situation in which attention makes something the object of perception and when atten-
tion is occupied in conscious thought, thus problematising the fact of having "objects" of
attention in thought.
Thirdly, if we move to the ﬁeld of emotions, the structure of the debate on cognitive
phenomenology is reproduced: some accounts defend, and some deny, that emotions
have distinctive phenomenal components. Gunther (2004), for instance, argues that some
emotional states have distinctive phenomenal properties, and Montague (2009) presents
emotions as intentional attitudes with affective phenomenology, which, she argues, is
non-sensory. The implications of this issue on cognition may be that, if these other
domains also possess a speciﬁc or distinctive phenomenal character, then there might be
continuity with the case of thought. But more closely related to the issue of cognitive phe-
nomenology is whether emotions possess cognitive elements that are experienced or have
cognitive phenomenology on their own. Cognitivist theories of emotions (see (Solomon
2004) for an overview), for example, might argue that the cognitive elements of emotions
provide evidence for cognitive phenomenology. On the other hand, perceptual accounts of
emotions, like Prinz's (2004), might restrict their phenomenal character to the one pos-
sessed by their sensory elements. Related to the ﬁeld emotions, one may also appeal to epis-
temic feelings, that is, feelings of knowing, understanding, remembering, etc. (Koriat 2000;
Arango-Mun˜oz 2014). The question here appears as to whether these feelings may have a
phenomenal character that is distinctively related to their cognitive elements. The familiar
tip-of-the-tongue phenomenon (whereby one knows and almost has the word for something
on one's lips or in one's head but fails to be able to ﬁnd it at that speciﬁc moment) has been
both proposed as an example of cognitive phenomenology (Goldman 1993) and as an
example of just sensory phenomenology (Lormand 1996). In any case, the ﬁeld of emotions
and feelings remains as an interesting area to be further explored.
Finally, and situating ourselves in a more general perspective, we can wonder about the
relation that the issues presented here have to general theories of consciousness, that is,
questions such as how the existence and nature of cognitive phenomenology affects theories
of consciousness or which are the consequences of such theories for the present matters. As
far as we know, only proponents of Higher Order Thought (HOT) Theories of conscious-
ness and of the Attended Intermediate Representation (AIR) Theory of consciousness have
addressed the question of the existence of cognitive phenomenology from within their
general theories. Brown and Mandik (2012), for example, argue that HOT theory of the
kind endorsed by Rosenthal (2005) entails the acceptance of cognitive phenomenology,
arguing that on the HOT theory all phenomenology is cognitive and that all conscious
thoughts have phenomenology. In contrast, Prinz (2011), building on his AIR theory of
phenomenal consciousness, argues for the limitation of phenomenology to the sensory
106
Marta Jorba and Dermot Moran

and perceptual domain, thus excluding cognitive phenomenology for conscious thought. As
far as we know, other theories of consciousness, such as the Global Workspace Theory
(Baars 1988), information integration theory (Tononi 2007), biological theories of con-
sciousness (Block 1978; Lamme 2003) and others have not yet provided detailed positions
regarding several aspects of the cognitive phenomenology debate. In our present issue,
though, Sebastia´n discusses "access" and "non-access" theories of consciousness in
order to assess the question of the relation of cognitive phenomenology and cognitive
access (see also Jorba and Vicente (2014) on this question), thus contributing to connecting
the cognitive phenomenology debate to some general theories of consciousness.
4.
Articles of the Special Issue
The articles of this Special Issue contribute to discuss several aspects of the cognitive phe-
nomenology debate and enlarge the discussion by connecting it to different topics and areas
of philosophical investigation. They are diverse in nature and so there are no relevant over-
laps in the topics they treat, except from agency (treated by Jansen, and Vicente and
Martı´nez-Manrique) and the self (considered in Guillot's and Jansen's contributions). In
what follows we introduce each article following the alphabetical order of the authors.
In the ﬁrst article, Fabian Dorsch focuses on the phenomenology of cognitive attitudes
or what they are like from the inside and raises a relevant connection between phenomenal
character and rationality. In particular, he examines two aspects that thoughts share with
experiences and that are phenomenologically salient: their rational role and their determi-
nation by external factors. In the case of judgemental thought, he defends the view that the
rational role of thoughts, that is, their capacity to respond to epistemic reasons provided
by other mental episodes or states, is constitutive of, or reﬂected in, their phenomenal
character. And more speciﬁcally, he argues that this rational role is phenomenologically
salient in virtue of the fact that judgmental thoughts are phenomenally marked as being
determined by such reasons. In so doing, the author comparatively discusses other
kinds of mental episodes such as pictorial experiences, imaginative thoughts, or episodic
memories.
In the second article, Marie Guillot, connects the cognitive phenomenology debate to
the discussion on the concept of self, the concept one uses to think about oneself as
oneself, by proposing an account of the concept of self as phenomenally grounded in the
phenomenology of intellection. She starts with a deﬁning feature of the concept, the
"Thinker Intuition" or the fact that I think of myself as the thinker (of this very thought)
and discusses the indexical view of capturing such a feature. Alternatively, she defends
what she calls the "phenomenal model" of the concept, which is based on the idea that
phenomenal concepts provide a good model for understanding the I-concept and, speciﬁ-
cally, that the phenomenal basis of the phenomenal-appearance I-concept is a generic
form of cognitive phenomenology, namely, the phenomenology of intellection. Guillot
ﬁnally argues that this view better grasps the Thinker Intuition, presents some advantages
in comparison to rival accounts and also discusses possible objections.
Julia Jansen, in the third article, addresses the question of our awareness of our cogni-
tive activity by drawing on Kant's conceptions of inner sense and apperception and Hus-
serl's notions of lived experience and self-awareness. In this way, she carefully connects
the contemporary cognitive phenomenology debate with the Kantian and Husserlian
accounts of what she calls "agentive" and "proprietary" aspects of their views. She
argues that one Kantian contribution to the debate is that the what it is like for me to be
aware of myself as thinker should be a proper part of cognitive phenomenology, and this
Conscious Thinking and Cognitive Phenomenology
107

in turn gives rise to the connection of cognitive phenomenology with agentive phenomen-
ology or the what-it's-likeness of experiencing one's behaviours as one's own actions.
Regarding Husserl, Jansen acknowledges that many Husserlian distinctions cut across
several assumptions in the contemporary debate but nevertheless points to what Husserl
calls "empty intentions" and "experiences of truth" as making a constitutive contribution
to phenomenal character. The author further presents Husserl's treatment of attention as
part of agentive aspects of cognitive phenomenology.
In the fourth contribution of this Special Issue, Agustı´n Vicente and Fernando Martı´nez-
Manrique, based on the experimental ﬁndings of Hurlburt et al., focus on a speciﬁc kind of
conscious thought, unsymbolised thinking, in order to provide an explanation of its origin.
They present a characterisation of the phenomenon as presenting two main properties: prop-
ositional character, which they defend gives us reasons to think that it is a conceptual and
syntactic phenomena, and effability, which shows us that it is a linguistic phenomenon.
Accordingly, they propose an account of the nature of unsymbolised thinking that is con-
tinuous with the activity of inner speech. More speciﬁcally, they argue that unsymbolised
thinking is a form of inner speech in which the speech action is aborted before the intention
to talk is implemented by motor commands. The authors further defend that this proposal
contributes to account for the elements of agency and ownership associated with both
unsymbolised thinking and inner speech. Finally they defend the hypothesis from a possible
objection and relate their account to the cognitive phenomenology debate.
Miguel A´ ngel Sebastia´n, in the ﬁfth article, presents a challenge to cognitive phenom-
enology defenders by examining the relation between access and phenomenal conscious-
ness in the domain of thought. He proceeds by assuming the view according to which
cognitive access is not constitutive of phenomenal consciousness in the cases of perception
and emotion. Then Sebastia´n construes a conditional argument according to which if the
mechanisms responsible for cognitive access can be disentangled from the mechanisms
that give raise to phenomenology, the same is to be expected in the case of thought. This
leads to the following dilemma: either there are thoughts with cognitive phenomenology
we lack access to or there is no cognitive phenomenology. He then argues in favour of
the ﬁrst horn of it by presenting empirical evidence of the existence of explicit thoughts
we lack cognitive access to.
The ﬁnal contribution of this Issue is Alberto Voltolini's treatment of Frege cases in
relation to cognitive phenomenology. The author argues against Kriegel's characterisation
of these cases in terms of a difference in cognitive phenomenology and alternatively pro-
poses an account of them that appeals to intentional objects conceived as schematic
objects, that is, objects that have no metaphysical nature insofar as they are just thought-
of - thus differentiating his account from Meinongian ones. Even if this alternative charac-
terisation does not appeal to cognitive phenomenology directly, Voltolini argues that cog-
nitive phenomenology is indirectly involved in these cases, given the "aha"-experience
involved in the realisation that presumable solves the cases.
Acknowledgements
This Special Issue has its origin in the international conference Phenomenology of Cognitive Experi-
ences organised by Dr Marta Jorba and Prof. Dermot Moran, held in University College Dublin
(UCD), Ireland, on 5-7 November 2014. Earlier versions of the papers by Marie Guillot, Julia
Jansen, Fernando Martı´nez-Manrique and Agustı´n Vicente, Miguel A´ ngel Sebastia´n and Alberto Vol-
tolini were presented at that conference.
108
Marta Jorba and Dermot Moran

Disclosure statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the authors.
Funding
This Special Issue was supported by the Irish Research Council New Foundations Award, UCD Seed
Funding, the UCD College of Human Sciences, and the UCD School of Philosophy. Financial support
for this work was provided by the DGI, Spanish Government, research projects FFI2010-16049 and
FFI2013-47948-P, by the Perspectival Thoughts and Facts Project (PERSP) of the Spanish research
and training network funded by the Consolider-Ingenio 2010 Scheme [grant number CSD2009-
00056], Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation (M.J.).
Note
1.
Nota bene: current researchers in the ﬁeld tend to use the term "phenomenology" in this rather
restricted sense, namely, in attempting to pick out the particular phenomenal character of experi-
ential states rather than invoking in any sense the phenomenological tradition or methods
employed by the classic phenomenologists.
Notes on contributors
Marta Jorba is lecturer at the University of Girona, Spain, and previously a Teaching and Research
Fellow at University College Dublin, Ireland. She received her Ph.D. in philosophy with a dissertation
on cognitive phenomenology. Her main research ﬁelds are philosophy of mind and phenomenology.
She has spent visiting research periods at the University of Copenhagen, New York University and
Universidade federal do Parana´.
Dermot Moran is Professor of Philosophy (Metaphysics & Logic) at University College Dublin,
Ireland, and President of the International Federation of Philosophical Studies/Fe´de´ration Internatio-
nale des Socie´te´s de Philosophie (FISP). He is author of a number of books, including: Introduction to
Phenomenology (Routledge, 2000), Edmund Husserl. Founder of Phenomenology (Cambridge:
Polity, 2005), Husserl's Crisis of the European Sciences: An Introduction (Cambridge University
Press, 2012), and The Husserl Dictionary (Bloomsbury, 2012), co-authored with Joseph Cohen.
References
Arango-Mun˜oz, Santiago. 2014. "The Nature of Epistemic Feelings." Philosophical Psychology 27
(2): 1-19.
Baars, Bernard J. 1988. A Cognitive Theory of Consciousness. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Bailey, Andrew R., and Richards, Bradley. 2014. "Horgan and Tienson on Phenomenology and
Intentionality." Philosophical Studies 167 (2): 313-326.
Bayne, Tim. 2009. "Perception and the Reach of Phenomenal Content." Philosophical Quarterly 59
(236): 385-404.
Bayne, Tim. Manuscript. "The Puzzle of Cognitive Phenomenology."
Bayne, Tim, and Michelle Montague. 2011. "Cognitive Phenomenology: And Introduction." In
Cognitive Phenomenology, edited by Tim Bayne and Michelle Montague, 1-34. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Bergson, Henri. 1946. The Creative Mind. An Introduction to Metaphysics. Translated by Mabelle
L. Andison. New York: Philosophical Library.
Bernet, Rudolf. 2016. "The Limits of Conceptual Thinking." In The Phenomenology of Thinking:
Philosophical Investigations into the Character of Cognitive Experiences, edited by Thiemo
Breyer and Chritopher Gutland, 147-164. London: Routledge.
Block, Ned. 1978. "Troubles with Functionalism." Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Sciences 9:
261-325.
Block, Ned. 1995. "On a Confusion About a Function of Consciousness." Brain and Behavioral
Sciences 18 (2): 227-247.
Conscious Thinking and Cognitive Phenomenology
109

Block, Ned. 1996. "Mental Paint and Mental Latex." In Perception, edited by Enrique Villanueva,
19-49. Atascadero, CA: Ridgeview.
Block, Ned. 2007. "Consciousness, Accessibility, and the Mesh between Psychology and
Neuroscience." Behavioral and Brain Sciences 30: 481-548.
Block, Ned. 2009. "Comparing the Major Theories of Consciousness." In The Cognitive
Neurosciences IV, edited by Michael Gazzaniga, 1111-1123. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Breyer, Tiemo, and Christopher Gutland. 2016. The Phenomenology of Thinking: Philosophical
Investigations into the Character of Cognitive Experiences. London: Routledge.
Brown, Richard. 2007. "The Mark of the Mental." Southwestern Philosophy Review 23 (1): 117-124.
Brown, Richard, and Peter Mandik. 2012. "On Whether the Higher-order Thought Theory of
Consciousness Entails Cognitive Phenomenology, or: What is it Like to Think that One Thinks
that P?" Philosophical Topics 40 (2): 1-12.
Byrne, Alex. 2011. "Knowing That I Am Thinking." In Self-Knowledge, edited by Anthony
Hatzimoysis, 105-124. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Carruthers, Peter, and Be´ne´dicte Veillet. 2011. "The Case Against Cognitive Phenomenology." In
Cognitive Phenomenology, edited by Tim Bayne and Michelle Montague, 35-56. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Chalmers, David J. 1996. The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Chudnoff, Eliah. 2015. Cognitive Phenomenology. London: Routledge.
Chudnoff, Eliah. 2016. "Moral Perception: High Level Perception or Low Level Intuition?" In The
Phenomenology of Thinking: Philosophical Investigations into the Character of Cognitive
Experiences, edited by Thiemo Breyer and Chritopher Gutland, 207-219. London: Routledge.
Chudnoff, Eliah. 2011. "The Nature of Intuitive Justiﬁcation." Philosophical Studies 153 (2): 313-
333.
Chudnoff, Eliah. 2013. "Gurwitsch's Phenomenal Holism." Phenomenology and the Cognitive
Sciences 12 (3): 559-578.
Crowell, Steven. 2016. "What Is It to Think?." In Phenomenology of Thinking. Philosophical
Investigations Into the Character of Cognitive Experiences, edited by Thiemo Breyer and
Chritopher Gutland, 183-206. London: Routlegde.
Dijksterhuis, Ap, and Loran F. Nordgren. 2006. "ATheory of Unconscious Thought." Perspectives on
Psychological Science 1 (2): 95-109.
Engelbert, Mark, and Peter Carruthers. 2011. "Descriptive Experience Sampling: What Is It Good
For?" Journal of Consciousness Studies 18: 130-149.
Farkas, Katalin. 2008. "Phenomenal Intentionality Without Compromise." The Monist 91 (2): 273-293.
Frankish, Keith. 2011. "Dual-Process and Dual-System Theories of Reasoning." Philosophy Compass
10: 914-926.
Geach, Peter. 1957. Mental Acts: Their Content and Their Objects. London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul.
Goff, Philip. 2012. "Does Mary Know I Experience Plus Rather Than Quus? A New Hard Problem."
Philosophical Studies 160 (2): 223-235.
Goldman, Alvin. 1993. "The Psychology of Folk Psychology." Behavioral and Brain Sciences 16 (1):
15-28.
Graham, George, Terence Horgan, and John Tienson. 2007. "Consciousness and Intentionality." In
The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness, edited by M. Velmans and Susan Schneider,
468-484. Oxford: Blackwell.
Graham, George, Horgan, Terence, and Tienson, John. 2009. "Phenomenology, intentionality and the
Unity of Mind." In The Oxford Handbook of the Philosophy of Mind, edited by Brian
McLaughlin, Ansgar Beckermann and Sven Walter, 512-535. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Gunther, York H. 2004. "The Phenomenology and Intentionality of Emotion." Philosophical Studies
117 (1-2): 43-55.
Hopp, Walter. 2016. "Empty Intentions and Phenomenological Character." In The Phenomenology of
Thinking: Philosophical Investigations into the Character of Cognitive Experiences, edited by
Thiemo Breyer and Christopher Gutland, 44-61. London: Routledge.
Horgan, Terence. 2011. "From Agentive Phenomenology to Cognitive Phenomenology: A Guide for
the Perplexed." In Cognitive Phenomenology, edited by Tim Bayne and Michelle Montague, 57-
78. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
110
Marta Jorba and Dermot Moran

Horgan, Terence, and John Tienson. 2002. "The Intentionality of Phenomenology and the
Phenomenology of Intentionality." In Philosophy of Mind: Classical and Contemporary
Readings, edited by David Chalmers, 520-533. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hurlburt, Russell. 2011. "Nine Clariﬁcations of Descriptive Experience Sampling." Journal of
Consciousness Studies 18 (1): 274-287.
Hurlburt, Russell, and Sarah Akther. 2008. "Unsymbolized Thinking." Consciousness and Cognition
17: 1364-1374.
Husserl, Edmund. 1970. Logical Investigations. 2 Vols. London: Routledge.
Husserl, Edmund. 2004. Wahrnehmung und Aufmerksamkeit. Texte aus dem Nachlass (1893-1912).
Husserliana 38. edited by Thomas Vongehr and Regula Giuliani. Dordrecht: Springer.
Jackson, Frank. 1982. "Epiphenomenal Qualia." Philosophical Quarterly 32: 127-136.
Jorba, Marta. 2015. "Thoughts, Processive Character and the Stream of Consciousness." International
Journal of Philosophical Studies 23 (5): 730-753.
Jorba, Marta. 2016. "Attitudinal Cognitive Phenomenolgy and the Horizon of Possibilities." In The
Phenomenology of Thinking: Philosophical Investigations into the Character of Cognitive
Experiences, edited by Thiemo Breyer and Christopher Gutland, 77-96. London: Routledge.
Jorba, Marta, and Agustı´n Vicente. 2014. "Cognitive Phenomenology, Access to Contents, and Inner
Speech." Journal of Consciousness Studies 21 (9-10): 74-99.
Kihlstrom, John F. 2013. "Unconscious Processes." In The Oxford Handbook of Cognitive
Psychology, edited by Daniel Reisberg, 176-186. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kirk, Robert. 1974. "Zombies vs Materialists." Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 48: 135-152.
Klausen, Søren Harnow. 2008. "The Phenomenology of Propositional Attitudes." Phenomenology
and the Cognitive Sciences 7 (4): 445-462.
Klausen, Søren Harnow. 2013. "Losing Belief, While Keeping up the Attitudes - The Case for
Cognitive Phenomenology." In New essays on Belief. Constitution, Content and Structure,
edited by Nikolaj Nottelman, 188-208. New York: Palgrave McMillan.
Koksvik, Ole. 2015. "Phenomenal Contrast: A Critique." American Philosophical Quarterly 52 (4):
321-334.
Koriat, Asher. 2000. "The Feeling of Knowing: Some Metatheoretical Implications for Consciousness
and Control." Consciousness and Cognition 9 (2): 149-171.
Kriegel, Uriah. 2006. "The Phenomenologically Manifest." Phenomenology and the Cognitive
Sciences 6: 115-136.
Kriegel, Uriah. 2011. The Sources of Intentionality. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kriegel, Uriah, ed. 2014. Phenomenal Intwntionality. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kriegel, Uriah. 2015. The Varieties of Consciousness. New York: Oxford University Press.
Kriegel, Uriah. 2016. "The Character of Cognitive Phenomenology." In The Phenomenology of
Thinking: Philosophical Investigations into the Character of Cognitive Experiences, edited by
Thiemo Breyer and Christopher Gutland, 25-43. London: Routledge.
Lamme, Victor. 2003. "Why Visual Attention and Awareness Are Different." Trends in Cognitive
Science 7: 12-18.
Levine, Joseph. 1983. "Materialism and Qualia: The Explanatory Gap." Paciﬁc Philosophical
Quarterly (October) 64: 354-361.
Levine, Joseph. 2011. "On the Phenomenology of Thought." In Cognitive Phenomenology, edited by
Tim Bayne and Michelle Montague, 103-120. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Loar, B. 2003. "Phenomenal Intentionality as the Basis of Mental Content." In Reﬂections and
Replies: Essays on the Philosophy of Tyler Burge, edited by M. Hahn and B. Ramberg, 229-
258. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lohmar, Dieter. 2016. "Non-Linguistic Thinking and Communication - Its Semantics and Some
Applications." In The Phenomenology of Thinking: Philosophical Investigations into the
Character of Cognitive Experiences, edited by Thiemo Breyer and Christopher Gutland, 165-
182. London: Routledge.
Lonergan, Bernard J. F. 1992. Insight: A Study of Human Understanding, Collected Works vol. 3,
edited by Frederick E. Crowe and Robert M. Doran. Toronto: University of Toronto.
Lormand, Eric. 1996. "Nonphenomenal Consciousness." Nous 30: 242-261.
McClelland, Tom. 2016. "Gappiness and the Case for Liberalism About Phenomenal Properties."
Philosophical Quarterly: NA. doi:10.1093/pq/pqv128.
Montague, Michelle. 2009. "The Logic, Intentionality and Phenomenology of Emotion."
Philosophical Studies 145: 171-192.
Conscious Thinking and Cognitive Phenomenology
111

Montague, Michelle. 2010. "Recent Work on Intentionality." Analysis 70 (4): 765-782.
Montague, Michelle. 2011. "The Phenomenology of Particularity." In Cognitive Phenomenology,
edited by Tim Bayne and Michelle Montague, 121-140. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Montague, Michelle. 2015. "Cognitive Phenomenology and Conscious Thought." Phenomenology
and the Cognitive Sciences, 1-15. doi:10.1007/s11097-014-9403-x.
Nagel, Thomas. 1974. "What Is It Like To Be a Bat?" Philosophical Review 83: 435-450.
Nes, Anders. 2012. "Thematic Unity in the Phenomenology of Thinking." Philosophical Quarterly 62
(246): 84-105.
Nes, Anders. 2016. "The Sense of Natural Meaning in Conscious Inference." In The Phenomenology
of Thinking: Philosophical Investigations into the Character of Cognitive Experiences, edited by
Thiemo Breyer and Christopher Gutland, 97-115. London: Routledge.
O'Brien, Lucy, and Matthew Soteriou, eds. 2009. Mental Actions. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pautz, Adam. 2013. "Does Phenomenology Ground Mental Content?" In Phenomenal Intentionality,
edited by Uriah Kriegel, 194-234. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Peacocke, Christopher. 1998. "Conscious Attitudes, Attention, and Self-knowledge". In Knowing Our
Own Minds, edited by Crispin Wright, Barry Smith and Cynthia Macdonald, 63-98. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Pitt, David. 2004. "The Phenomenology of Cognition or What Is It Like to Think That P?" Philosophy
and Phenomenological Research 69: 1-36.
Pitt, David. 2009. "Intentional Psychologism." Philosophical Studies 146 (1): 117-138.
Pitt, David. 2011. "Introspection, Phenomenality, and the Availability of Intentional Content." In
Cognitive Phenomenology, edited by Tim Bayne and Michelle Montague, 141-173. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Pitt, David. Manuscript. Forthcoming. "Unconscious Thought." In The Quality of Thought. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Prinz, Jesse. 2004. "Embodied Emotions." In Thinking About Feeling: Contemporary Philosophers
on Emotions, edited by Robert C. Solomon, 44-58. New York: Oxford University Press.
Prinz, Jesse. 2007. "All Consciousness is Perceptual." In Contemporary Debates in the Philosophy of
Mind, edited by Jonathan Cohen and Brian P. McLaughlin, 335-357. Oxford: Blackwell.
Prinz, Jesse. 2011. "The Sensory Basis of Cognitive Phenomenology." In Cognitive Phenomenology,
edited by Tim Bayne and Michelle Montague, 174-196. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Robinson,
William.
2005.
"Thoughts
Without
Distinctive
Non-Imagistic
Phenomenology."
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 70 (3): 534-562.
Robinson, William. 2011. "A Frugal View of Cognitive Phenomenology." In Cognitive Phenomenology,
edited by Tim Bayne and Michelle Montague, 197-214. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rooth, Anthony Robert, and Darrell P. Rowbottom. 2014. Intuitions. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Rosenthal, David M. 2005. Consciousness and Mind. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Schwitzgebel, Eric. 2008. "The Unreliability of Naive Introspection." Philosophical Review 117 (2):
245-273.
Searle, John. 1989. "Consciousness, Unconsciousness and Intentionality." Philosophical Topics 17
(l): 193-209.
Shields, Christopher. 2011. "On Behalf of Cognitive Qualia." In Cognitive Phenomenology, edited by
Tim Bayne and Michelle Montague, 215-235. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Siegel, Susanna. 2010. The Contents of Visual Experience. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Siewert, Charles. 1998. The Signiﬁcance of Consciousness. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Siewert, Charles. 2011. "Phenomenal Thought." In Cognitive Phenomenology, edited by Tim Bayne
and Michelle Montague, 236-267. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Smith, David Woodruff. 2011. "The Phenomenology of Consciously Thinking." In Cognitive
Phenomenology, edited by Tim Bayne and Michelle Montague, 345-372. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Smith, David Woodruff. 2016. "Phenomenally Thinking about This Individual." In Phenomenology
of Thinking. Philosophical Investigations Into the Character of Cognitive Experiences, edited by
Thiemo Breyer and Christopher Gutland, 62-76. London: Routledge.
Smith, David Woodruff, and Amie Thomasson, eds. 2005. Phenomenology and Philosophy of Mind.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Smithies, Declan. 2013. "The Signiﬁcance of Cognitive Phenomenology." Philosophy Compass 8 (8):
731-743.
112
Marta Jorba and Dermot Moran

Solomon, Robert C., ed. 2004. Thinking about Feeling. Contemporary Philosophers of Emotions.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Soteriou, Matthew. 2007. "Content and the Stream of Consciousness." Philosophical Perspectives 21
(1): 543-568.
Soteriou, Matthew. 2009. "Mental Agency, Conscious Thinking and Phenomenal Character." In
Mental Actions, edited by Lucy O'Brien and Matthew Soteriou, 231-253. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Soteriou, Matthew. 2013. The Mind's Construction. The Ontology of Mind and Mental Action.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Spener, Maja. 2011. "Disagreement about Cognitive Phenomenology." In Cognitive Phenomenology,
edited by Tim Bayne and Michelle Montague, 268-284. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Stout, G. F. 1891. "Apperception and the Movement of Attention." Mind 16 (61): 23-53.
Strawson, Galen. ([1994] 2010). Mental Reality. 2nd ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Strawson, Galen. 2006. "Why Physicalism Entails Panpsychism." In Consciousness and its Place in
Nature: Does Physicalism Entail Panpsychism?, edited by Anthony Freeman, 3-31. Exeter:
Imprint Academic.
Strawson, Galen. 2008. Real Materialism and Other Essays. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Strawson, Galen. 2011. "Cognitive Phenomenology: Real Life." In Cognitive Phenomenology, edited
by Tim Bayne and Michelle Montague, 285-325. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Tononi, Giulio Srinivasan. 2007. "The Information Integration Theory of Consciousness." In The
Blackwell Companion to Consciousness, edited by Max Velmans and Susan Schneider, 287-
299. Malden: Blackwell Publishing.
Tye, Michael. 1995. Ten Problems of Consciousness: A Representational Theory of the Phenomenal
Mind. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Tye, Michael, and Briggs Wright. 2011. "Is There a Phenomenology of Thought?" In Cognitive
Phenomenology, edited by Tim Bayne and Michelle Montague, 326-344. Oxford and
New York: Oxford University Press.
Van Gulick, Robert. 2014. "Consciousness." In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, edited by
Edward N. Zalta. http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2014/entries/consciousness/.
Velmans, Max, and Susan Schneider. 2007. The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness. Malden:
Blackwell.
Woodworth, Robert S. 1906. "Imageless Thought." Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientiﬁc
Methods 3 (26): 701-708.
Conscious Thinking and Cognitive Phenomenology
113

