Sports Ethics and Philosophy
ISSN: 1751-1321 (Print) 1751-133X (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rsep20
The Remarkable Logic of Autism: Developing and
Describing an Embedded Curriculum Based in
Semiotic Phenomenology
Maureen Connolly
To cite this article: Maureen Connolly (2008) The Remarkable Logic of Autism: Developing and
Describing an Embedded Curriculum Based in Semiotic Phenomenology, Sports Ethics and
Philosophy, 2:2, 234-256, DOI: 10.1080/17511320802223824
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/17511320802223824
Published online: 18 Jul 2008.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 555
View related articles 
Citing articles: 4 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rsep20

THE REMARKABLE LOGIC OF AUTISM:
DEVELOPING AND DESCRIBING AN
EMBEDDED CURRICULUM BASED IN
SEMIOTIC PHENOMENOLOGY
Maureen Connolly
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a wildly heterogeneous lived experience of stressed
embodiment. Many children, youths and adults with ASD are unable to access meaningful,
relevant physical activity programmes because of the complexities associated with their
behavioural, emotional and communicative idiosyncrasies. This paper describes an approach to
designing, implementing and evaluating a movement-education-based embedded curriculum
which was developed using semiotic phenomenology as a theoretical framework for observations,
description and analysis of lived experiences of ASD.
Resumen
El trastorno del espectro del autismo (TEA) [Autism spectrum disorder (ASD)] es una muy
heteroge´nea experiencia vivida del cuerpo en tensio´n. Muchos nin˜os, jo´venes y adultos con TEA
son incapaces de acceder a programas de acticidad fı´sica signiﬁcativos y pertinentes a causa de
las complejidades asociadas con sus idiosincracias de comportamiento, emocionales, y
comunicativas. Este artı´culo describe un enfoque para disen˜ar, poner en pra´ctica y evaluar un
currı´culo incorporado basado en la educacio´n del movimiento que fue desarrollado utilizando la
fenomenologı´a semio´tica como un armazo´n para la observacio´n, descripcio´n y ana´lisis de las
experiencias vividas del TEA.
Zusammenfassung
Zur Autismusspektrumsto¨rung (ASS) za¨hlt eine Fu¨lle heterogener ko¨rperbezogener Erfahrungen.
Viele Kinder, Jungendliche und Erwachsene sind aufgrund der Komplexita¨t ihrer verhaltens-,
emotions- und kommunikationsbezogenen Eigenheiten nicht in der Lage, in sinnvoller Weise an
entsprechenden Bewegungsprogrammen teilzunehmen. Dieser Artikel beschreibt einen Ansatz zur
Formung, Implementierung und Bewertung von Lehrpla¨nen im Hinblick auf Bewegungserziehung.
Dieser Ansatz wurde mithilfe semiotischer Pha¨nomenologie als dem theoretischen Rahmenkon-
zept zur Beobachtung, Beschreibung und Analyse der gelebten/praktischen Erfahrung von ASS
entwickelt.
Sport, Ethics and Philosophy, Vol. 2, No. 2, August 2008
ISSN 1751-1321 print/1751-133X online/08/020234-23
ª 2008 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/17511320802223824

KEYWORDS
semiotic phenomenology; movement education; autism spectrum disorder; lived
experience; embedded curriculum
Introduction
The movement-education-based embedded curriculum I have developed and
implement in an ongoing way has emerged out of my 30 years working with children,
youth and adults with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), and in particular the past ten
years working with a stable cohort within an environment where I can train and
facilitate an instructional staff. Buttressed by empirical, anecdotal, comparative and
research
literature
sources,
I
employ
semiotic
phenomenology
as
a
theoretical
framework for understanding and describing lived experiences of ASD. I will here
discuss implications of this theoretical framework for physical activity programming
with persons with ASD.
In this paper I offer what I believe to be an alternative, complementary approach to
understanding and describing lived experiences of ASD and embodied expressions of
these lived experiences. I have arrived at this point of proposing an alternative approach
to understanding and describing after more than three decades of working with children,
youth and adults who manifest the accepted proﬁle of ASD, the last ten years spent in
intense, systematic observation, analysis, and programming with a consistent group over
time.
ASD is a wildly heterogeneous condition, and everyone living with ASD manifests an
idiosyncratic proﬁle, albeit within the broad parameters of accepted features associated
with ASD. This being said, I base my curricular model in the dominant tendencies and
qualities I have observed over the years (most of which are consistent with the literature)
as I have constructed movement proﬁles on the children, youth and adults with whom I
have worked—and from whom I have learned and continue to learn. My paper will unfold
in the following sequence: (a) a background section which will include a summary
overview of the premises of movement education and similar overview of ASD and the
more prevalent and traditional—as well as emerging—approaches to managing it. In the
ASD overview I will also include material on sensory integration and conceptual models of
learning, since familiarity with this subject matter is important for context; (b) a section
describing and discussing the theoretical frameworks I have utilised and what they have
allowed me to notice, interrogate, propose, develop, evaluate and reﬁne; and (c) a section
describing and discussing my methodology for developing and monitoring the embedded
curriculum, including background on movement proﬁling, habits of body informing the
THE REMARKABLE LOGIC OF AUTISM
235

curricular model and descriptions of actual environments and activity programmes and
their consequences in the lives of persons with ASD.
Background
Movement Education
Movement education is an approach to the body which inﬂuences teaching,
learning and attitude in physical/bodily-based programmes. It is based on the premises
that there are overarching 'themes' of the moving body—body, space, quality, (effort) and
relationship—which are always present, regardless of the movers, the context or the
activity (Laban 1949, cited in Connolly 1993). These 'existential' movement themes allow
the teacher to plan activities which are inclusive, i.e., which operate at a conceptual
planning level. Examples might be 'sending' as an activity rather than perfecting the
mature pattern of the overhand throw, or 'stability' rather than learning a handstand
balance. This is not to say that overhand throwing and handstands do not happen in
movement education settings—they most certainly do; but the emphasis is on
understanding, contextualising, developing and reﬁning movement patterns that are
relevant and meaningful to the learners at their own skill levels; the emphasis is not on
everyone in the class doing the same thing, at the same time, in the same way. A thematic
or conceptual approach to designing and presenting tasks allows for an array of 'correct'
responses and the opportunity to reﬁne movement patterns and broaden the movement
repertoire. Movement education also has high efﬁcacy as a therapeutic intervention.
Persons who experience bodily stress as a result of crisis, trauma, chronic pain, depression
or anxiety can learn muscle relaxation and re-patterning techniques which allow them a
modest to signiﬁcant degree of autonomous management of their stress. In addition to
relaxation and re-patterning, movement proﬁles (developed out of systemic and
prolonged observation/analysis) can identify dominant, underdeveloped and absent
components in a functional and expressive movement repertoire, thereby allowing for
individualised programming in under-developed and absent areas of neuro-physiological
and expressive development.
This kind of movement-education-based approach is especially powerful for
individuals with developmental delays and/or dramatically idiosyncratic movements and
behaviour habits. There is room for the 'unusual' or 'unmanageable' body habits or
behaviours, possibilities for expanding beyond the existing habits and behaviours, and
opportunities for neuromuscular integrative activities to assist in the challenges posed by
delayed, missed or under-resourced motor—as well as other developmental—milestones.
Movement education, with its strong links to concept understanding at the bodily, as well
as linguistic level, makes it an ideal complement for programmes whose focus is
interactive/relational development. The blending of cognitive, social, emotional and
bodily-based activities provides an environment which holds great promise for adaptation,
resourcefulness, adventure and meaning making.1
ASD and Approaches to Managing It
The current deﬁnition of ASD, although reﬁned and broadened over the years,
remains remarkably consistent with the features observed in Kanner's (1943) original
236
MAUREEN CONNOLLY

group of children. Three general categories of behavioural impairment are common to all
or most persons who have ASD:
1.
A qualitative impairment of reciprocal social interaction;
2.
A qualitative impairment in the development of language;
3.
Restricted, repetitive and stereotyped patters of behaviour, interests and activities.
These three categories are further reﬁned through consideration of delays or atypical
functioning in at least one of the following areas, with onset prior to age three years: (1)
social interaction; (2) language as used in social communication; or (3) symbolic or
imaginative play.
Asperger's Syndrome and pervasive developmental disorder (PDD) have also been
introduced as diagnoses for milder cases which may be on an autistic continuum but are
not believed to meet the full criteria of ASD. In addition, persons with ASD commonly have
unusual responses to sensory stimuli that can be exaggerated or diminished and positive
and negative (depending on context) (Talay-Ongan and Wood 2000; Bellini 2004; Canavera
et al. 2005).
Theories abound as possible explanations for this complex way of being in the
world; among the most widely consulted are Hobson's (1991) affective developmental
theory, Baron-Cohen's (1988, 1989) cognitive theory of mind approach, and Josef Perner's
(1991) distinction between the theory of mind and the capacity for meta-representation.
Each of these theories serves to illuminate and interrogate the others, and the research—
and research debates—continue. In addition, investigation is ongoing regarding less
explored psychological and neurological bases for ASD and their possible intersections.
Notable among these include Burnette et al.'s (2005) inquiry into weak central coherence
and its relation to theory of mind and anxiety in autism; Dykens and Hodapp's (2000) work
on genetic causes of developmental disability and Shasty's (2003) molecular genetics of
autism spectrum. Contemporary debates fuelled by MRI technologies also acknowledge
the complexity of brain adaptation—i.e. are the changes noted in the various sites causing
or responding to ASD?
My examination of the literature has allowed me to develop immense respect for the
persistence, creativity and ﬁndings of cognitive, affective, perceptual, psychological and
neurological frameworks. It has also allowed me to notice the relative absence of
investigation grounded in embodied (i.e., somatic or 'lived body') or semiotic approaches
and frameworks.
Management, Programming and Intervention
While there have been accounts of 'recovery' from ASD, it is more likely than not that
most people living with the condition work with strategies of management rather than
cure. Chronic illness types of management models are the most prevalent, emphasising
support to the child, youth or adult and family; 'treatment' of or interventions into
problematic characteristics and complications when possible; and intensive and ongoing
efforts to improve the overall functional status of the person with ASD. Evidence suggests
that such approaches (based on current knowledge of what works with ASD) can lead to
improved functioning and adaptation in many cases and to improved family coping
abilities and quality of life in most.
THE REMARKABLE LOGIC OF AUTISM
237

According to the prevailing wisdom, the most important aspect of management,
both at the home and in the educational environment, is implementation of an effective
behavioural training programme. The details of such programming vary with individual
cases, but the speciﬁc techniques are drawn from behavioural modiﬁcation principles of
behavioural psychology. The general goal is to use speciﬁc types of reinforcement to
encourage desirable behaviours and reduce undesirable behaviours. It generally is agreed
that positive reinforcement, as opposed to punitive approaches, most often is effective at
promoting improvement in skills.
Categories of enablers used in behavioural approaches include consistent routines
and schedules, knowledge of expectations, de-sensitisation processes, rehearsal strategies,
stimulus cues, environmental adaptations, augmentative communication, peer advocates
and motivational procedures. The greatest success occurs when these efforts are started at
an early age and used consistently both in the home and in the school or programme
site(s). For most children and youths with ASD, educational management typically
emphasises development of social skills and communicative language, the long-term goal
being a functional and comfortable placement in a least restrictive environment.
Children with ASD generally do best when daily routine and schedule are highly
predictable, and when they are well prepared for any variations in routine. The educational
plan will also include helping the child gradually learn to accept greater levels of variation
and unpredictability.
Many specialised programmes for the treatment of children with ASD have
attempted to incorporate these principles. Several widely known and well-documented
examples include Dunlap and Fox's (1996) work on early intervention strategies, Krantz
and McClannahan's (1999) strategies for integration and transition, Barbara and Mitchell-
Kvacy's (1994) excellent articulation of positive behavioural support approaches, and a
number of institutionally-based programmes, including Division TEACCH, developed by
Schopher, Mesebov and associates at the University of North Carolina, the Indiana
Resource Centre for Autism, and Lovaas and associates in California. Other approaches
include pharmacological management—increasingly seen as limited—nutritional and
vitamin interventions and more unconventional therapies such as facilitated communica-
tion and auditory integration training. In any approach that is taken, family support and
advocacy—including stress and conﬂict management, respite and counselling—are critical
components.
Most of the programming and interventions developed for persons with ASD are
based in behavioural models, largely because behaviour is the most visible and unnerving
manifestation of ASD. Aversion techniques—sometimes quite extreme—positive reinfor-
cement strategies, altering the physical environment and varying task variables are among
the approaches employed to control, address or eliminate undesirable behaviours and/or
repetitive non-functional behaviours (Carr et al. 1996; Koegel et al. 1996; Ghezzi et al.
1999).
Physical activity and exercise programmes are among more recent approaches to
addressing behaviours of ASD (Reid et al. 1983; Miller and Miller 1989; Reid et al. 1991;
Levinson and Reid 1993; Kaufman 1994). These studies point to the signiﬁcance of physical
activity for reducing negative behaviours and improving quality of life. Other studies
within the same area of concern focus more on the intensity and vigorousness of the
activity (Elliot et al. 1994; Todd and Reid 2006) and on embodied strategies of meaning
for the person with ASD (Connolly and Craig, 2001; Pan and Frey 2006; Carr and
238
MAUREEN CONNOLLY

Owen-DeSchryver 2007). The curriculum I have developed considers intensity, as well as
type and quality of movement. The details and signiﬁcance of these factors will be
discussed further in the concluding section of this paper as well as considerations, timing,
frequency and markers of effectiveness.
Sensory Integration
Sensory or sensorimotor integration is deﬁned in the cognitive science and
disability/rehabilitation literature as the organisation of sensory information for practical
use. This organisation occurs within the brain and spinal cord (the central nervous
system—CNS), and is often referred to as central processing. Intrasensory and intersensory
integration
are
outcomes
of both
sensorimotor
and
perceptual
motor
training.
Intrasensory integration refers to improved function within one sensory system;
intersensory integration refers to improved function across sensory systems.
Ten modalities provide sensory input that must be organised and processed by
human subjects. These are touch and pressure, kinaesthetic-proprioceptive, vestibular,
temperature, pain, smell, taste, vision, audition, the common chemical sense (e.g., eyes
burning when peeling an onion). Each modality has a special type of sensory receptor (end
organ) that is sensitive only to certain stimuli, and each has a separate pathway from the
sensory receptor up the spinal cord to the brain. Sensory systems especially important to
motor learning are tactile and deep pressure, kinaesthetic, vestibular and visual. When
these systems exhibit 'delayed' or 'atypical' functioning, motor development and/or
learning is affected.
Perceptual-motor (P-M) learning is acquiring knowledge about the self and the
environment through the integrated processes of sensation, perception and action that
occur during spontaneous or teacher/parent-guided movement exploration. P-M learning
includes processes of memory, cognition, perceptual-motor skills, sensorimotor integra-
tion, perception/decoding and attention. These processes overlap and blend together to
constitute central processing.
During the ﬁrst two years of life, sensory integration usually 'happens' automatically.
It develops without the conscious involvement of the developing child, and most of us
experience sensory integration (if we bother to think about it at all) as a necessary (albeit
taken for granted) feature of being in the world as a concordant (stable, healthy,
productive) entity. Likewise with perceptual-motor development, the development
'happens' between the ages of two and seven and we take the gifts of this development
as typical and natural.
ASD can be manifested as profound disruptions in sensory integration and
perceptual-motor functioning, especially executive control/central processing challenges,
curiously ampliﬁed responses to sensory input and the dys-integration of sensory and
perceptual-motor functioning itself.
Children and adults with autism must live in the world without the taken-for-
granted, already established, invisible functioning of sensory integration and perceptual-
motor
development.
The
lived
experiences
of
children
and
adults
with
such
ongoing disruptions compel a deeper examination of normalising narratives of social
control, commodity exchange and bodily/behavioural codes (i.e., the politics of
sensory integration) and the expectations of ongoing concordance and 'normal
functioning'.
THE REMARKABLE LOGIC OF AUTISM
239

Conceptual Models of Learning
A developmental continuum is a way of describing where a person is located
along a series of developmental states or milestones. For example, self-care skills: if a
child is able to dress himself or herself, and attend to his or her own toileting and
personal hygiene, then this achievement places that child at a particular location along
a continuum of self-care and independence skills. If these skills are learned by age
three to ﬁve, then the child is probably on a par with so-called 'typical' child
development; if these skills are not in place by age eight, or 12, or 18, then signiﬁcant
interventions and assistance are needed in order for the person to participate in the
activities of daily living (ADL) with choices, equity and dignity. Another example might
be conﬂict resolution skills or decision-making skills. Usually we see the beginnings of
mature development in these areas by pre-adolescence, but there are many instances
of adults in their 20s, 30s and beyond who have not developed healthy conﬂict
resolution or decision-making strategies. Likewise physical development follows a
similar progression—particular motor experiences and patterns are seen as signiﬁcant
milestones in healthy neurological development.
When considering the concept of a developmental continuum, several overarching
principles must be taken into account:
1.
The dimensions of development are interdependent and intertwined; this means that
physical, emotional, cognitive and social development are dependent on each other
and contribute to each other, and that programming interventions must be
integrated across the dimensions if we are to see signiﬁcant outcomes in any of the
dimensions.
2.
A developmental continuum is age- and ability-inclusive; this means that persons with
and without disabilities exhibit various extremes of the same developmental area. For
example, language development: a child with ASD may have little or no language
development by age ﬁve, whereas children without developmental delays may exhibit
fairly proﬁcient speech patterns and vocabulary by that age. By contrast, children who
grow up in under-resourced environments (without books, ongoing nurturing
interaction/conversation or signiﬁcant adult attention) may also show delayed or
skewed language and concept development. Aggression and impulse control are
other areas where neuro-physiological or environmental inﬂuences may contribute to
similar manifestations of developmental delay. And it is certainly the case that a person
does not have to manifest extreme degrees of behaviour in order for an intervention
to be appropriate.
3.
It is never too late to begin programming/interventions for developmental issues; later
interventions into established habits can be challenging but persistence within a
meaningful, digniﬁed, relevant programming environment usually results in modest to
signiﬁcant improvements.
Not only do I work within a shared understanding of a developmental continuum
along which any and all learning can occur, I also work within conceptually driven models
of learning—that is to say, I believe there are deep concepts which apply to many kinds of
learning and I am more interested in teaching these concepts than in re-enforcing single
events which may have no transfer to other events or situations. For example, the concept
240
MAUREEN CONNOLLY

of 'shape' is a deep one, which cuts across many kinds of learning. If I understand the
shape of my foot, then I can ﬁnd the correct shape for my shoe; if I understand how
'round' works, then I will be able to manage buttons and buttonholes, hats, cereal bowls,
lids on jars and bottles and so forth. If I understand up, down, right and left, then I will
realise that I have a top and bottom half to my body, as well as a left and a right side; I will
understand stairs, elevators, high and low, tall and short; I will cross the mid-line of my
body, making more complex neurological processing possible. These kinds of learning
transfers do not occur when I learn in a context of disconnected, arbitrary or unrelated
skills and activities.
Exploring Alternative Theoretical Frameworks
Before providing the necessary thumbnail sketches of the several non-behavioural
frameworks I employ, I must emphasise that the bodily-based understandings and
interventions I have developed are offered as parallel and not oppositional discourses. I
employ many of the features already described in my own programmes, but they are
facilitated,
and,
I
believe,
enhanced
through
bodily-based
movement
education
programming.
I work within a complex blending of a number of theoretical frameworks. I primarily
identify as a semiotic phenomenologist, heavily inﬂuenced by the theoretical work of
Maurice Merleau-Ponty (1962) and Richard Lanigan (1988) and the more applied semiotic
phenomenological work of Tom Craig (1997, 1998, 2000) and Jackie Martinez (1999). I
would be remiss if I did not also acknowledge the edited collection Semiotics and Disability
(Rogers and Swadener 2001) and especially the essay on the 'Miller Method' by Christine
Cook. I should also disclose my own ideological posture and postcolonial biases as well as
my years of training in Laban-based movement education, overlaid on three decades of
training and practice within physical education and adapted physical activity with the
neurological, biomechanical and motor control frameworks therein.
In its most naively articulated form, phenomenology is the study of lived
experiences or meaning structures as they reveal themselves to an (embodied)
consciousness. Phenomenologists attempt to suspend the 'natural attitude' or already
assumed 'truths' or 'givens' about the everyday world. With this bracketing technique (i.e.,
the placing of one's so-called certainties in brackets) phenomenologists try to experience
phenomena as if they had not been encountered or accounted for. In this way the eidetic
features or meaning structures of phenomena which might be missed because of
presumption or assumption can be encountered and perceived. A common method
used within this reductive aspect of phenomenological analysis is free imaginative
variations, whereby the understanding of phenomena is pushed to its extreme limits of
existential possibility. This allows phenomenologists to consider features and interpreta-
tions that might be dismissed as preposterous by the constraints of more traditional
approaches.
Further, since consciousness is necessarily embodied, the phenomenological body is
constructed as subject/object. This serves to highlight the tension between having and
being a body (Lyon and Barbalet 1994). In his book, Phenomenology of Perception, Merleau-
Ponty (1962) developed a conception of human embodiment which attempted to
transcend mind-body dualism. He grounded perception in the experienced and
experiencing body. The world as perceived through the body was, for Merleau-Ponty,
THE REMARKABLE LOGIC OF AUTISM
241

the ground level of all knowledge, for it is through the body that people gain access to the
world. Human perception of everyday reality depends upon a 'lived body' (Bendelow and
Williams 1995)—that is, a body that simultaneously experiences and creates the world.
This expresses the essential ambiguity of human embodiment as both personal and
impersonal, objective and subjective, social/cultural and natural. In the process of inquiry,
phenomenologists work though a recursive and embodied process of description,
reduction and interpretation all the while taking into account the Lieb—animated living
through the experiential body (body for itself)—and Korpor, the objective exterior
institutionalised body (the body in itself).
Invoking the semiotic aspect of semiotic phenomenology means locating the lived
body within the codes and signs of a given culture. The body is located at the nexus of
lived experience and culture, a portal, a site, an experience. Lanigan's (1988) semiotic
phenomenological analysis adds a cultural dimension to the aforementioned phenom-
enological process of description, reduction and interpretation. It considers the norms and
inscriptions of a culture, the body as sign (of political discourse) and the sign systems that
hold these together. This analysis necessitates a semiotic and phenomenological
examination of the contexts—large and small—that constitute culture and that constrain
choices. Lanigan encourages strategies of choice of context as opposed to working only
within contexts of choice (i.e., where the choices or interpretations are already
predetermined by the context). This is an especially helpful framework for studying
disability, pain and other forms of stressed embodiment which typically are studied within
already established contexts. It is also a more culturally and contingency sensitive
approach which acknowledges the complex ways in which ASD, as a 'carnal property'
(Paterson and Hughes 1999), is culturally produced and productive.
Semiotic phenomenological approaches are politically postcolonial in their ideology
critique and also resonate with infusion- and inclusion-based and cultural/social minority
perspective approaches (Sherrill, 1994; Sherrill and Williams, 1996; Sherrill and DePauw
1997). In addition, they allow for an interrogation of tokenistic and/or ablest-driven efforts
at integration at all costs, approaches that are coming under critique from an increased
presence of disability studies scholars and theorists.
Lived experience accounts are also considered signiﬁcant data/capta for semiotic
phenomenological approaches, hence I have included insider accounts of ASD from
Temple Grandin (1986, 1995), Donna Williams (1992; Williams-Venables 1995) and Raun
Kaufman (1994) in the development of my analysis and appreciation of ASD, and in the
development of an embedded curriculum based in habits of body generated or disclosed
by stressed embodiment.
I have also included conversations with the children, youths and adults with ASD
with whom I have worked, especially over the past ten years, and conversations with
parents, workers and consultants. And, because I am a movement educator, I cannot
neglect the observations and analyses of movement I have conducted, again particularly
with my cohort of the past ten years. Martha Graham, a movement educator and dancer,
claimed that 'movement never lies—it is a barometer telling the state of the soul's weather
for all who can read it' (Graham 1997, cited in Connolly and Lathrop 1997). My experience
certainly bears this out, I have chosen to suspend cultural norms and inscriptions
regarding appropriate behaviour—especially as they relate to embodied expressions of
lived experience characteristic of people with ASD - and have chosen to accept these
embodied expressions as serious sites of somatic exploration and understanding.
242
MAUREEN CONNOLLY

Approaching ASD this way has allowed me to ask embodied questions. For example,
Grandin's and Williams's autobiographical writing reveals the intensely stressful experience
of sensation from the perspective of the experiencer. Auditory, visual and tactile
sensations can be particularly distressing by virtue of how intensely they are manifested
for the person with ASD. Further, sensory integration is often a problem for persons with
ASD, so there is the constant stress of managing sensation as separate corridors of
existence, with the potential for each one to interfere with any or all of the others. I
propose that this management of the taken-for-granted is exhausting and anxiety-
producing, but it is also 'normal' or 'familiar' for persons with ASD. Because this way of
being in the world calls for an ongoing state of readiness (or bracing against the world), it
is not surprising that many persons with ASD manifest extreme muscle tension (and
possibly concomitant pain) but since this is also 'normal' or 'familiar' it is seldom spoken of
by those who are verbal, and difﬁcult to access in those who are non-verbal. Touch is a
powerful modality for muscle tension assessment and treatment, but focused observation
is equally helpful in locating tension sites. Once located, a tension site can be considered
both a doorway and a pathway. It is a way into understanding expressions of distress, and
it is a journey into very unfamiliar, usually deep, embodied experience.
Sensation may also be ampliﬁed for persons with ASD. As someone with an
extremely broad auditory range, I can testify to the distress I feel when I hear (or sense)
certain sounds or pitches of sounds. Often others around me do not hear what I hear. This
is a frequent event for persons with ASD. They 'receive' across a remarkably broad sound
and sight spectrum. When they cover their ears or pull at their ears, or scream or exhibit
other signs of distress, I choose to believe it might be in response to an experience of
intense and uncontrollable sensory stimulation. When one sensation becomes the focus
of attention, it is also possible that it is also serving as ﬁlter for or respite from the chaos of
non-integration of sensation. According to Grandin, Williams, Kaufman, Vanden-Abeele
(2001) and others, many persons with ASD have an over-aroused or 'wild' nervous system.
When this is coupled with 'high stim' environments (motion, smells, patterns, sounds, to
name a few), one can almost predict levels of embodied overload that have to ﬁnd an
outlet (i.e., that will be processed for an embodied response appropriate to the internal
'logic').
Working semiotically and phenomenologically has allowed me to ask questions such
as: If I cannot feel my skin as a boundary between me and the world, what might I do to
create some awareness of that boundary? What if this were a ﬂuctuating experience? What
if I discovered strategies to make myself present to myself—might I repeat them? Or the
converse: if my skin feels everything, what might I do to protect myself? What surfaces or
textures might be more soothing? Or: how do I process my body's physiological responses
to emotion? Or: how might I manage one activity when so much is happening
simultaneously? How do I know what separates one experience from another?
If I am working from the premise that the lived body is the site of meaning-making,
then many behaviours associated with ASD can be seen as embodied solutions to
existential, neurological, sensory or motor trauma or crisis rather than outbursts of
deliberate deviance.
For example, if I do not know where my body ends and the world begins, one
solution might be to use nudity against deﬁnite textures or in intense temperatures;
another solution might be craving pressure, another might be self-biting. Furthermore,
some sites of the body may be highly sensitised to stimulation in some persons with ASD
THE REMARKABLE LOGIC OF AUTISM
243

(such as the mouth or ﬁngertips, or head or nose), so these sites may emerge as 'ﬁrst
responses' to a 'loss' of self.
Highly sensitised skin feels even the slightest stimulation, so deﬁnite or soothing
surfaces, textures or contrasting types of pressure might provide relief. Fixations can be
strategies for stillness: when a whole world is in motion, achieving some form of stillness is
helpful for self-locating. Structure and ritual can contain or 'rein in' an indeterminate,
messy blending of space, time and tasks. I have found it helpful to create singular events
with distinct beginnings and endings so that an eventual sequence of events can unfold
without undue anxiety associated with trying to prevent or discern overlap.
My observations, interactions and ongoing semiotic and phenomenologically
grounded interrogations of the embodied expressions of persons with ASD have led me
to some tentative and ongoing 'working premises':
1.
That the expressions that are developed and/or displayed to me are logical solutions
based in an embodied intentionality that need not be based in a pre-established array
of neurological 'givens'—i.e., I choose to experience the children, youths and adults in
my programmes as geniuses trying to solve problems (usually without context-
sensitivity or meta-knowledge) rather than deviants trying to annoy me;
2.
The more extreme behaviours are manifestations of more extreme terror or
unmanageability and my efforts have to go towards identifying or locating the
source of the distress in addition to treating the distress;
3.
Interventions that are bodily-based, digniﬁed, contrasting and physically exhausting
(i.e., intense gross motor activity) can be effective if they are imagined from the
perspective of the person with ASD;
4.
Most of the people I have worked with have an uncanny sense of my motives and
feelings; they are remarkable barometers—with and without language. This compels
me to be authentic; and
5.
If I believe in the authenticity of embodied expression, then I must base my
programming and interventions on it. This means rethinking the norms and
inscriptions of cultures based in largely deterministic/behaviourist and productivist
values and processes. And I must continue to return to the body as my source, my gut-
check, my self-examination. Thus:
When one is oneself uprooted, what is the point of talking to those who think they
have their own feet on their own soil? The ear is receptive to conﬂicts only if the body loses
its footing. A certain imbalance is necessary, a swaying over some abyss, for a conﬂict to be
heard. Yet when the foreigner—the speech—denying strategist—does not utter his
conﬂict, he in turn takes root in his own world of a rejected person whom no one is
supposed to hear. The rooted one who is deaf to the conﬂict and the wanderer walled in by
his conﬂict thus stand ﬁrmly, facing each other. It is a seemingly peaceful coexistence that
hides the abyss: an abysmal world, the end of the world (Kristeva 1991, 17).
My experiences with persons with ASD over the past several years make it impossible for
me to perpetuate a charade of peaceful coexistence which hides the abysses and wonders
of lived experiences of ASD. Our strangeness to each other need not be the end of a
shared world. We have to move to a place of learning from each others' differences (and
embodied experiences) rather than creating hierarchies of legitimacy which exclude (or
244
MAUREEN CONNOLLY

reprogramme) those who not ﬁt within the narrow parameters of what is considered to be
the 'norm'.
For persons with ASD—who can live anywhere along simultaneously occurring and/
or clashing neurological, existential, sensory, perceptual and relational continua—the
body is a sign of political discourse. Perhaps the willingness—and courage—to embrace
our own experiences of uprootedness might be a helpful, humane and embodied strategy
for reimagining what counts as 'common ground'.
Methodology for Developing an Embedded Curriculum
A few comments are called for on the strategy of embedded curriculum. The overall
structure and content are based in the ﬁndings observed over time (ten years) and across
contexts (a highly heterogeneous group and a variety of activity settings) and consistent
with the neuro-physiological literature. Nevertheless, what I have developed is also
necessarily customised to the idiosyncrasies of each person participating in the various
movement programmes. The behavioural and attention challenges are immense and
require creative teaching and facilitation. One of the tendencies that has been noted as
prevalent is the relative absence of midline crossing in the children and youth. Typically,
children begin midline crossing as infants (e.g. two hands grabbing one foot) and continue
on with thousands of repetitions over the years. Developmentally, I cannot expect to make
up for the loss of these repetitions; however, I can set an environment where midline
crossing happens regardless of the activity that is scheduled. Likewise, I cannot expect
children to engage in high repetition of midline crossing on demand or command.
Instead, I must make it inevitable and unavoidable within the activity they are doing.
Examples include pulling with two hands on a rope, pushing with two hands on a stick,
deliberate cross-body reaching for objects. In this way midline crossing is embedded and
does not have to be requested.
Embedding the movement patterns that need attention allows me to work from a
lived body perspective within a cultural system of signs and honour the insider's stories
and experiences as expressed through autobiographies, biographies, anecdotes, observa-
tion and analysis and, increasingly, blogs and other digital media (e.g., Second Life).
The curriculum content and processes have developed over time and are
adaptable to each participant's needs. There are, however, habits of body that have
consistency across heterogeneity and these form the core of the embedded curriculum.
These habits of body are the ﬁndings of years of observation and analysis based in
Laban movement principles and employing a process of movement proﬁling for each
participant involved in a movement program. The proﬁles are based in the movement
education template (see Appendix) which considers a variety of subcategories within the
existential movement themes of body, space, effort/quality and relation—i.e., in lived
(perceptual) as well as experienced (sensory) contexts. A summary description of
movement proﬁling follows.
When it comes to observing movement—especially idiosyncratic habits of body—
'seeing it' means more than simply looking. Laban movement analysis offers a non-
mechanistic, adaptable, body-friendly approach to observing human movement across
contexts and ability levels. Developed by the Austro-Hungarian dancer, choreographer
and movement theorist Rudolf Laban, movement education thematic analysis has been
used in performance, competition, rehabilitation, training and workplace settings since the
THE REMARKABLE LOGIC OF AUTISM
245

1930s. The beauty of the analytic method is that it provides a framework for observation, a
language for description, a notation system for preserving the movement and a logic for
therapeutic and/or pedagogic intervention.
The framework is a deceptively simple matrix of existential themes of movement:
body, space, quality and relation (Laban 1949). Within each of these thematics are features
or components which allow for more detailed and individualised breakdown of the
overarching theme. For example, within a consideration of body one would engage in a
deeper consideration of shape, function, body-part responsibilities, symmetry and
asymmetry, weight transfer, balance, locomotion and gesture, among others. A
consideration of SPACE would compel examination of personal and general use of and
awareness of space, directions, pathways, levels, near and far extensions, planes of
movement and so forth. If one observed a mover (over time and across context) avoiding
or demonstrating distress in the low level, one could anticipate the long-term
developmental, strategic and neurological effects of this avoidance, and plan an
appropriate intervention.
Movement proﬁling allows a teacher, coach or therapist to observe a mover over
time and across contexts using the features and components of each theme to develop a
'movement ﬁngerprint', such that not only dominant patterns become apparent, but also
missing features become apparent. Here, one can plan interventions, use the dominant
patterns to facilitate the interventions and then do a follow-up proﬁle to assess the effect
of the intervention on the movement repertoire. Since movement-education language is
conceptual and non-pejorative, it can be used in any situation with any mover of any
movement capacity.
The movement proﬁle, developed out of Laban movement education analysis, can
function as a pedagogic, evaluative, pre-post comparative, training and therapeutic tool. It
complements other measurement modalities, and can be easily taught to coaches,
parents, teachers and other interested professionals.
Habits of Body (Dominances and Absences in the Movement Repertoire)
The following represents a summary of the most consistent habits of body noted
from the observations and analysis (i.e., movement proﬁling).
Dominances in the movement repertoire: ﬁne, sudden movement; limbs kept near the body;
ﬂexed spine; same-side or no-arm action; toe walking; uneven gait; balance and balance-
regain issues; pathway drifting; uneven skill development.
Absences in the movement repertoire: midline crossing; ﬁrm movement; extension of spin
and hip; running gait; landings with control; gradual deceleration; contralateral arm-leg
movement; weight transfer variety; contrast.
General or less speciﬁc habits of body include consequences of seemingly absent or
underdeveloped sensory integration and motor milestones (including anxiety, distract-
ibility, need for structure, problematic problem solving and decision-making); ﬁxations—
including 'codes', metaphors, objects; stimming; over-aroused nervous system; sensory
hyper-sensitivities (especially in the 'built' environment); vestibular and perceptual issues;
absent, underdeveloped or unevenly developed gross motor activity, especially involving
246
MAUREEN CONNOLLY

intense exertion in a ﬁrm, sustained time/weight register; underdeveloped, hyper-
developed or selectively developed body awareness.
Ingredients in the Embedded Curriculum
The embedded curriculum at work in my movement programmes is made up of
environmental, content, process and instructional components. I shall describe each of
these in the following paragraphs.
Environment
I aim to create an environment low in excess stimulation, which also allows for
maximal involvement of the body with the absences from the movement repertoire. Thick,
absorptive surfaces compel sustained foot contact with the ﬂoor, reduce speed of
movement and force ﬁrm weight qualities in the large muscles. Unstable surfaces (inclines,
declines, absence of perpendicularity and ﬂatness) and obstacles compel ongoing balance
loss and regain, controlled and cushioned falls, vestibular and kinaesthetic adjustments
and dorsi-ﬂexion at the foot (the heels forced into the surface by virtue of the surface itself
assists in reducing toe-walking). Dim or subdued lighting and few or no patterns on walls
or ﬂoors reduce distractions from extraneous visual stimuli. Contrast in height, task
function and inside/outside and/or wet/dry allow for deﬁnite 'felt' separations between
one type of activity or task and another and allow for activity sequencing to be achieved
with more distinctiveness in the attributions and identiﬁers/signiﬁers (i.e., the semiotics
of each space). Heavy and non-bouncy objects require more gross motor activity for
lifting, compel sustained time and ﬁrm weight qualities and reduce noise. Many
possible entries and exits and the movement equipment stations compel problem-solving
and the potential for avoidance, parallel and interactive play. Typical equipment includes
thick and heavy mats, heavy props, medicine balls, non-bounce balls and other
manipulables, trampolines (large and small), blankets, towels, ropes, scooters, games
equipment, ﬁne motor props and toys, containers for toys, equipment set-ups that can be
got inside of, parachutes, mattresses, cushions, ladders, trestles and benches, stacking
boxes.
Content and Process
Movement programmes, whether they are in a once-a-week, daily or 'summer camp'
intensive format, are necessarily structured and predictable, with visual schedules, social
stories, scripting and re-directing as signiﬁcant processes. There is a high level of
attunement for body signs of frustration, anxiety and tension and digniﬁed intervention
for calming (for example, deep pressure is helpful for many tactile stressors). Time-based
activities have distinctive tactile and visual markers for beginnings, middles and endings.
Typical activities include body awareness work on core-distal relationships; spinal ﬂexion
and extension and assisted ﬂexibility; pushing, pulling, dragging, lifting and carrying; mid-
line crossing via gripping, climbing and various forms of reaching across the body to the
opposite side; activities that compel intense gross motor activity and result in muscle
fatigue; landings from a variety of heights; weight transfers and weight bearing on various
combinations of body parts (other than hands and feet).
THE REMARKABLE LOGIC OF AUTISM
247

Instructional Strategies
Participants with ASD typically do not initiate play or activity episodes and, once
engaged in an activity, do not conclude or exit episodes well. For this reason—and others
(e.g. lack of impulse control, self-injury) facilitation must be ongoing, vigilant, attentive
with a neutral and calm demeanour, no sense of urgency and an even, somewhat
emotionally ﬂat and lower-volume voice.
When involving students in my movement programmes, I work with direct
instruction or as low a teacher-learner ratio as possible on concept learning, which impacts
across the dimensions of physical, cognitive, emotional and social development. The
outcome goals are relatively simple:
1.
Identify the strengths and weaknesses in a person's developmental repertoire, and
then use appropriate and digniﬁed interventions to reﬁne the strengths and address
the weaknesses in ways which make it possible for the person to interact in
meaningful ways with developmentally and/or age compatible peer groups;
2.
Continue to reﬁne the programme intervention so that continued development occurs
across the developmental dimensions in ways which are consistent with the person's
proﬁle;
3.
Involve a support team in the developmental process in ways which enhance the
ongoing development of the members of the team.
The Gymnasium Space and Pedagogic Intentionality
Each participant has an individualised programme and this program is housed in the
larger context of gymnasium spaces and activity areas designed speciﬁcally to address the
tendencies within ASD which seem to cut across the heterogeneity of each individual
living with ASD. I believe our groundedness in a phenomenological orientation enables us
to design spaces which are 'insider'-driven and autism-friendly. Further, it allows me to
suspend my assumptions and codes of 'normalcy' and preconceptions of what ought to
happen so that I can imagine what needs to happen in order to provide a healthy
environment as I move towards expanding the movement and social repertoires of my
participants.
The gymnasium is deceptively regular in appearance—an inviting activity space
for
young
children—yet
it
is
a
strategic
space
with
a
deliberate
pedagogical
rationale where equipment and space are speciﬁcally arranged for the developmental
needs of the children who will dwell there for the duration of the planned activity or
programme. As has been previously mentioned, the equipment and small apparatus are
conﬁgured and used in ways which acknowledge the lived experiences of ASD and
which provide opportunities to expand the movement repertoires (or limit horizons).
Several examples of linkages between ASD lived experience and embedded curriculum
follow:
1.
Mats on the ﬂoor to soften the noises made by balls, small apparatus, and feet. Noise
can be a frightening stimulus for many children with ASD and can progress to a level
of making participants literally sick or moving to various degrees of panic.
248
MAUREEN CONNOLLY

2.
Minimal perpendicular/vertical structures since these tend to be overly compelling for
children who are over-selective with vertical and horizontal tracking.
3.
Practically no ﬂat surfaces—mostly inclines, declines and changes in level and texture
of surfaces so that vestibular, tactile and kinaesthetic systems can be stimulated
simultaneously.
4.
Ropes, bean bags, and squeezable objects compel ﬁrm, sustained gripping action—a
necessary contrast to the ﬁne, sudden, ﬂicking actions that tend to dominate the
movement repertoires of many children with ASD.
5.
Heavier than usual balls and other objects to stimulate large muscle activity. Sustained
action against a resistance involves the neuromuscular system in ways that contrast
the usual movement patterns of the activities of daily living in ASD. Also, many
children are either hypotonic or hypertonic, and need intense and consistent
neuromuscular stimulation.
6.
Variety and open space within the larger space allows for motion to be spread out
over a larger surface area. Too much motion or 'busy-work' in one area can be over-
stimulating and distressing for children with ASD.
7.
Portable movement tasks—i.e., no matter where children are working, the focus is on
developing sustained time and ﬁrm weight qualities, kinaesthetic awareness of body
parts relative to each other and the body core, tactile awareness of deep pressure and
body boundaries, vestibular activities which compel balance regain, and large muscle
activity which calls upon consistent neuromuscular involvement.
When a programme intervention works, it works conceptually and it works across
the developmental dimensions. For example, when I do physical programming involving
intense and vigorous gross motor activity, the child experiences a different kind of
neuromuscular involvement in the activity; this usually results in fatigue—real fatigue, not
simply the cumulative distress of being in the world—and the child sleeps through the
night. Parents continually remark on the improved sleep patterns following these physical
programmes and the ripple effects, including parental sleep and the fact the child is more
alert and attentive in morning, exhibits less unmanageable behaviour at night and is at
ease in learning tasks, to name a few. Further, gross motor activity stimulates more
focused cognitive learning and more manageable social skills programming (since the
child is calmer).
Observed outcomes in the movement programme participants include: real fatigue
and real sleep; improvements in ﬁtness and strength and expansion in the movement
repertoire, hence improvements in self-sufﬁciency and activities of daily life; improvements
in motor milestones; reduction in 'stimming'2 behaviours; improvements in redirection
and self-selection of preferred modes of relaxation; some improvements in social read,
activity initiation, parallel and partner play. A welcome outcome for parents, workers and
teachers is an increased awareness of early signs of distress, hence earlier implementation
of appropriate interventions.
Larger Outcomes and Consequences
The ASD population is quite diverse, in so far as it is also homogeneous in its
disability base. The families with whom I work are located variously across the
developmental dimensions: high, medium and low economic status; graduate, university,
THE REMARKABLE LOGIC OF AUTISM
249

professional, high-school or grade-school educations; high, moderate and low involve-
ment in their children's lives and programming.
The factor that seems to stand out as common across these families who are living
with a person with a disability is stress—there are high levels of stress based in
uncertainty, guilt, scheduling, funding, programmes, schools, interpersonal communica-
tion and time management, to name a few of the contributing factors. This stress can and
does manifest itself in pain, insomnia, forgetfulness, depression, anxiety, irritability,
despair, intensities of emotion and a variety of related illnesses (migraines, ulcers, heart
disease, G-I disorders, respiratory disorders). When I introduce a programme intervention
for the person with a disability, it often creates a ripple effect, and other aspects of family
life are also affected.
When the parents are involved in aspects of programming, the child beneﬁts from
the ongoing, consistent application and reinforcement of concepts over time and across
contexts, but the parents also beneﬁt. They learn focus, planning, attending, listening and
observing skills; they learn how to give appropriate feedback; they learn balance and
priority in their own lives; they learn more effective stress management; and they learn to
be more reﬂective about their own behaviours.
Meaningful movement programmes such as the embedded curriculum described in
the paper also have incalculable professional development, policy development,
pedagogic and scholarly beneﬁts, including:
1.
continued provision of a necessary service based in physical activity;
2.
opportunities to study and increase understanding of persons with ASD;
3.
opportunity for inter-agency liaison;
4.
heightened proﬁle of ASD in the community;
5.
expanded movement and social skills repertoires in programme participants;
6.
movement proﬁles are portable to schools and specialised programs as benchmarks
for evaluation of progress;
7.
increased exposure to ASD for young professionals in training;
8.
increased potential for transdisciplinary work (especially across disciplines using
markedly differing methodologies, i.e., semiotic phenomenology and neurophysiol-
ogy);
9.
appreciation for scholarship and pedagogy with a basis in narrative, lived experience
and robust observation.
Concluding Comments
Patti Lather (1991) sees socially conscious research leading to theory-building with a
difference: that is, theory that is generated out of the everyday world and in conjunction
with people living in their everyday worlds. In Lather's words:
For praxis to be possible, not only must theory illuminate the lived experience of
progressive social groups, it must also be illuminated by their struggles. Theory
adequate to the task of changing the world must be open-ended, non-dogmatic,
speaking to and grounded in the circumstances of every day life. It must, moreover, be
premised on a deep respect for the intellectual and political capacities of the
250
MAUREEN CONNOLLY

dispossessed. This position has profound substantive and methodological implications.
(Lather 1991, 55)
The basic ingredients of such approaches include the 'informants' as active agents in
the construction and validation of meaning out of their own experiences (e.g. accounts,
life-world descriptions), the questioning of the 'given' or 'natural' in a dialogic
enterprise, and a focus on fundamental contradictions which demonstrate how
'ideologically frozen understandings' (Comstock 1982, 384) are not able to serve the
interests of the people involved. Gradual and more courageous forays into ideology
critique call for prolonged engagement and many entry points as participants move to
a negotiation of meaning beyond the descriptive level, which necessarily includes
negotiation with consciousness, unconsciousness and false consciousness in self and
others,
not
to
mention
the
often
shattering
acknowledgement
of
the
carnal,
heterogeneous body.
It is the authentic engagement with the carnal, heterogeneous bodies of the
children, youth and adults with ASD that I have worked with that forms the basis of the
embedded curriculum. This engagement has been made viable as a scholarly praxis using
semiotic phenomenology as both orientation and methodology.
A few contemporary phenomenological theorists (most notably Maurice Merleau-
Ponty) grant a legitimacy to the lived body, inextricably intertwined with inter-
subjective,
communicative,
expressive
projects
of
lived
relation.
Indeed,
in
his
Phenomenology of Perception Merleau-Ponty critiques perceptual faith as a habitual
unreﬂexivity
based
on
a
subject-object
epistemology
within
a
pre-established
standpoint in which subjects perceive the world from a detached and distant
perspective (Merleau-Ponty 1962, 13-14). To counter this naive notion, Merleau-Ponty
proposes a concrete subject as the existential 'lived body' (corps propre) that must not
be bracketed out but rather taken in as the starting point of all phenomenological
analysis. However, in spite of what body-friendly educators (and researchers) see as the
enlightened embrace of actual bodies in some phenomenological work, in the main,
much phenomenological work is committed to (and premised on) the ontological self-
givenness of the so-called 'objective body'.
Merleau-Ponty (in The Cogito of Phenomenology of Perception) presents a critique of
an ideology of rationality as being unable to go beyond itself, by virtue of its having to use
its own internal criteria to continue to validate its own concordances. According to
Merleau-Ponty, all that one has to do to get out of this loop is to 'recognise these
phenomena which are the ground of all our certainties. The belief in an absolute mind, or
in a world in itself detached from us is no more than a rationalisation of this primordial
faith' (1962, 409).
Moving away from the ground of all our certainties requires a human-science
approach which is both bodily based and culturally (and, often times, politically) sensitised.
Lanigan's (1988) semiotic phenomenology provides a helpful theoretical framework for
exploring embodied contingency (e.g. the stressed embodiment of ASD) by combining
phenomenological explication of the freedom of individual expression with semiotic
analysis of the ﬁeld of culturally sedimented perception. Here, I can work carefully with the
expressive bodies of programme participants as they disclose through words, codes,
movement, habit and gesture how they live with and through autism spectrum disorder.
Here, I can honour their bodily expressions by creating and adapting a curriculum that is
THE REMARKABLE LOGIC OF AUTISM
251

responsive to them while at the same time building bridges to a shared community and
culture. Ultimately, it is the body I must take seriously as my guide and my muse. In
Merleau-Ponty's words:
If the subject is in a situation, even if he is no more than a possibility of situations, this is
because he forces his ipseity into reality only by actually being a body, and entering the
world through the body. In so far as, when I reﬂect on the essence of subjectivity, I ﬁnd it
bound up with that of the body and that of the world, this is because my existence as
subjectivity is merely one with my existence as a body and with the existence of the
world, and because the subject that I am, when taken concretely, is inseparable from this
body and this world. The ontological world and body which we ﬁnd at the core of the
subject are not the world or body as idea, but on the one hand, the world itself,
contracted into a comprehensive grasp, and on the other hand, the body itself as a
knowing body. (1962, 408)
The embedded curriculum articulated in this paper is a project of reading movement
and honouring bodies. Such a project is theoretically defensible through a semiotic
phenomenology of the experience of the body coupled with a consciousness of choice,
and it is experientially constituted by a phenomenological and semiotic sensibility
grounded in the actual bodies we—all of us—live.
NOTES
1.
A detailed outline of the Laban grid used in proﬁle development can be read in
Appendix A.
2.
'Stimming' . . . stimming is any repetitive, usually gestural or movement-based behaviour
exhibited by a person with autism which the observer assumes has no purpose or which
appears to the observer to provide a form of escape from an undesired situation for the
person engaging in the stimming.
REFERENCES
BARBARA, L.M. and A.A. MITCHELL-KVACY. 1994. Positive behavioural support for students with
developmental disabilities: An emerging multi-component approach for addressing
challenging behaviours. School Psychology Review 23: 263-78.
BARON-COHEN, S. 1989. Social and cognitive deﬁcits in autism: Cognitive or affective? Journal of
Autism and Developmental Disorders 18: 379-402.
———. 1988. The autistic child's theory of mind: A case of speciﬁc developmental delay.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 30: 285-97.
BELLINI,
S. 2004. Social skill deﬁcits and anxiety in high functioning adolescents with
autism spectrum disorders. Focus on Autism and Other Developmental Disabilities 19
78-86.
BENDELOW, G. and S. WILLIAMS. 1995. Transcending the dualisms: Towards a sociology of pain,
Sociology of Health and Illness 17: 139-55.
BURNETTE, C., D. CHARAK, J. MEYER, P. MUNDY, S. SUTTON and A. VAUGHAN. 2005. Weak central
coherence and its relation to theory of mind and anxiety in autism. Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders 35: 63-73.
252
MAUREEN CONNOLLY

CANAVERA, K., D. EVANS, F. KLEINPETER, E. MACCUBIN and K. TAGA. 2005. The fears, phobias and
anxieties of children with autism spectrum disorders and down syndrome: comparisons
with developmentally and chronologically age matched children. Child Psychology and
Human Development 36: 3-26.
CARR, E.G. and J.S. OWEN-DESCHRYVER. 2007. Physical illness, pain and problem behaviour in
minimally verbal people with developmental disabilities. Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders 37 (3): 413-24.
CARR, E.G., C.E. REEVE and D. MAGITO-MCLAUGHLIN. 1996. Contextual inﬂuences on problem
behaviours in people with developmental disabilities. In Positive Behavioural Support,
edited by L.K. Koegel, R.L. Koegel and G. Dunlap. Baltimore, MD: Brookes.
COMSTOCK, D. 1982. A method for critical research. In Knowledge and Values in Social and
Educational Research, edited by E. Bredo and W. Feinberg. Philadelphia, PA: Temple
University Press.
CONNOLLY, M. 1993. Respecting children's voices: Shared sentiments in the work of Waksler,
Lather and Laban. Human Studies 16: 457-567.
CONNOLLY,
M.
and
T.
CRAIG.
1999.
Your
body
tells
me
stories:
Living
pain,
ﬂirting
madness, transforming care, Narratives of Professional Helping 5 (4) (Disability and
Diversity): 16-26.
———. 2001. Stressed embodiment: Doing phenomenology in the wild (Invited essay in 25th
anniversary issue of Human Studies). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
CONNOLLY, M. and A. LATHROP. 1997. Maurice Merleau-Ponty and Rudolf Laban - an interactive
appropriation of parallels and resonances. Human Studies 20: 27-45.
CRAIG, T. 1997. Disrupting the disembodied status quo: Communicology in chronic disabling
conditions. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale.
———. 1998. Liminal bodies, medical codes. In Semiotics 1997 (Proceedings of 22nd annual
meeting of the Semiotics Society of America). New York: Peter Lang Publishing.
———. 2000. A funny thing happened on the way to renown: On the concrete essence of
chronic illness and the intercorpoeal weight of human suffering. Paper presented in the
panel Articulating Phenomenologies of Embodied Speaking Subjects', annual meeting of
Society for Phenomenology and the Human Sciences, Pennsylvania State University, 5-7
Oct.
DALRYMPLE, N. 1992. Helpful Responses to Some of the Behaviors of Individuals with Autism.
Bloomington, IN: Indiana Resource Center for Autism, Indiana University.
DUNLAP,
G.
and
L.
FOX.
1996.
Early
intervention
and
serious
problem
behaviours:
A comprehensive approach. In Positive Behavioural Support, edited by L.K. Koegel,
R.L. Koegel and G. Dunlap. Baltimore, MD: Brookes.
DYKENS, E.M. and HODAPP, R.M. 2000. Applying the new genetics. In Genetics and Mental
Retardation Syndromes, edited by E.M. Dykens, R.M. Hodapp and B.M. Finucane.
Baltimore, MD: Brookes.
ELLIOT, R.O., A.R. DOBBIN, G.D. ROSE and H.V. SOPER. 1994. Vigorous aerobic exercise versus general
motor training activities: Effects on maladaptive and stereotypic behaviours of adults
with both autism and mental retardation. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders
24 (5): 565-76.
GHEZZI, P.M., W.L. WILLIAMS and J.E. CARR, eds. 1999. Autism Behavioural - Analytic Perspectives.
Reno, NV: Context Press.
GRANDIN,
T. 1995. Thinking in Pictures. New York: Vintage.
GRANDIN, T. and M. SCARIANO. 1986. Emergence: Labeled Autistic. Novato, CA: Arena Press.
THE REMARKABLE LOGIC OF AUTISM
253

HOBSON, R.P. 1991. What is autism? Psychiatric Clinician, North America 14: 1-17.
KANNER, L. 1943. Autistic disturbances of affective contact. Nervous Child 2: 217-50.
KAUFMAN, R. 1994. Son-rise: The Miracle Continues. Tiburon, CA: H.J. Kramer.
KOEGEL, L.K., R.L. KOEGEL and G. DUNLAP, eds. 1996. Positive Behavioural Support. Baltimore, MD:
Brookes.
KRANTZ, P.J. and L.E. MCCLANNAHAN. 1999. Strategies for integration: Building repertoires that
support transitions to public schools. In Autism Behavioural - Analytic Perspectives, edited
by P.M. Ghezzi, W.L. Williams, and J.E. Carr. Reno, NV: Context Press.
KRISTEVA, J. 1991. Strangers to Ourselves, trans. Leon S. Roudiez. New York: Columbia University
Press.
LANIGAN, R. 1988. Phenomenology of Communication. Pittsburgh, PA: Duquesne University
Press.
LATHER, P. 1991. Getting Smart - Feminist Research and Pedagogy with/in the Postmodern. New
York: Routledge.
LEVINSON, L. and G. REID. 1993. The effects of exercise intensity on the stereotypic behaviors of
individuals with autism. Adapted Physical Activity Quarterly 10 (3): 255-68.
LOVAAS, I. 1981. The Me Book. Austin, TX: Pro Ed.
LYON, M.L. and J.M. BARBALET. 1994. Society's body: Emotion and the somatization of social
theory. In Embodiment and Experience: The Existential Ground of Culture and Self, edited by
T.J. Csordas. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
MARTINEZ, J. 1999. Phenomenology of Chicana Experience and Identity. New York: Roman and
Littleﬁeld.
MERLEAU-PONTY, M. 1962. trans. Colin Smith. Phenomenology of Perception. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
The Humanities Press.
MILLER, A. and E.E. MILLER. 1989. From Ritual to Repertoire: A Cognitive-developmental Systems
Approach with Behaviour-disordered Children. New York: John Wiley and Sons.
PAN, C. and G.C. FREY. 2006. Physical activity patterns in youth with autism spectrum disorders.
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 36 (5): 597-606.
PATERSON, K. and B. HUGHES. 1999. Disability studies and phenomenology: The carnal politics of
everyday life. Disability and Society 14 (5): 597-610.
PERNER, J. 1991. The Representational Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
REID, G., D. COLLIER and M. CAUCHON. 1991. Skill acquisition by children with autism: Inﬂuence of
prompts. Adapted Physica Activity Quarterly 8: 357-66.
REID, G., D. COLLIER and B. MORIN. 1983. The motor performance of autistic individuals. In Adapted
Physical Activity, edited by R. Eason, T. Smith, and F. Caron. Champaign, IL: HKP.
ROGERS, L.J. and B.B. SWADENER, eds. 2001. Semiotics and Disability - Interrogating Categories of
Difference. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
SCHOPLER, E. and G.B., MESIBOV, ed. 1987. Neurobiological Issues in Autism. New York: Plenuum
Press.
SHASTY, B. 2003. Molecular genetics of autism spectrum disorder. Journal of Human Genetics 48
(10): 495-501.
SHERRILL, C. and K.P. DEPAUW. 1997. Adapted physical activity and education. In History of Exercise and
Sport Science, edited by J.D. Massengale and R.A. Swanson. Champaign, IL: HKP.
SHERILL, C. and T. WILLIAMS. 1996. Disability and sport: Psychosocial perspectives on inclusion,
integration, and participation. Sport Science Review 4 (1): 42-64.
SHERILL, C. 1994. Least restrictive environments and total inclusion philosophies: Critical analysis.
Palaestra 10 (3): 25-35.
254
MAUREEN CONNOLLY

SZATMARI,
P. 1991. Asperger's syndrome: Diagnosis, treatment, and outcome. Psychiatric
Clinician, North America 14: 81-93.
TALAY-ONGAN, A. and K. WOOD. 2000. Unusual sensory sensitivities in autism: a possible crossroad.
International Journal of Disability, Development and Education 47 (2): 201-12.
TODD, T. and G. REID. 2006. Increasing physical activity in individuals with autism. Focus on Autism
and Other Developmental Disabilities 21 (3): 167-76.
VANDEN-ABEELE, J. 2001. Training, sport and dance for persons having a disability - person
centered and action-oriented dynamic approach. Paper presented in conjunction with
the Active Living Alliance for Canadians with a Disability, 12th annual forum, Brock
University, St Catharines, Ontario, 14-18 June.
WILLIAMS, D. 1992. Nobody Nowhere: The Extra-ordinary Autobiography of an Autistic. New York:
Times Books/Random House.
WILLIAMS-VENABLES, D. 1995. Non-ﬁrings, over-ﬁrings, and mis-ﬁrings: The confusing case of
making sense of emotions. MAAP Newsletter 1: 3-5.
Maureen Connolly, Physical Education and Kinesiology, Faculty of Applied Health
Sciences, Brock University, 500 Glenridge Avenue, St Catherines, ON L2S 3A1,
Canada. E-mail: mconnoll@brocku.ca
THE REMARKABLE LOGIC OF AUTISM
255

APPENDIX
Movement concepts
Body Awareness
Space Awareness
Effort
Relationships
1. Basic body
function:
bend, curl,
stretch or twist
2. Body parts can:
1. Personal space -
kinesphere:
a) 3-dimensional
cross
b) diagonals
1. Qualities:
a) weight - ﬁrm
(strong)
- ﬁne (light)
- heavy
1. With objects:
a) manipulative -
send/receive/
retrain
b) nonmanipulative -
a) bend, curl,
stretch or twist
b) lead an action
c) be used
symmetrically
or asymmetrically
3. Weight bearing:
a) support
(body parts
taking weight)
b) transference
of weight
c) balance -
counterbalance -
counter-resistance -
counter tension
4. Body actions:
a) locomotion
b) elevation
c) turns
d) gestures
e) inversion
5. Body shapes:
pin, wall, ball, screw
6. Symmetrical and
asymmetrical use
of the body
7. Motion and
stillness
c) planes
2.General space:
a) levels - high/
medium/low
b) pathways - air -
ﬂoor (straight,
angular
curved, twisted)
c) extensions -
large, small,
near, far
d) directions
3. Space words:
over, under,
around, near,
far, towards,
away from,
onto, into,
above, below
4. Using space:
explore,
penetrate, ﬁll,
surround,
replace
5. Spatial
mass
b) time - sudden
(fast)
- sustained
(slow)
c) space - direct
(straight)
- ﬂexible (wavy)
d) ﬂow - bound
(stoppable)
- free (ongoing)
2. Emphasize
one element
3. Emphasise
two elements
4. Basic effort
actions:
3 elements
a) thrust-sudden/
ﬁrm/direct
b) slash-sudden/
ﬁrm/ﬂexible
c) ﬂick-sudden/
ﬁne/ﬂexible
d) dab-sudden/
ﬁne/direct
e) press-sustained/
ﬁrm/ﬂexible
f) wring-sustained/
ﬁrm/ﬂexible
g) ﬂoat-sustained/
ﬁne/ﬂexible
h) glide-sustained/
ﬁne/direct
obstacle/
extension/
target/apparatus
2. With people:
a) alone
b) alone in a mass
c) partners,
small groups,
large groups
(cooperatively/
competitively)
copy question/
answer
match action/
reaction
mirror dance
together
contrast travel
with unison
lead/follow
conversation
cannon send/
receive
take turns
merge/disperse
meet/part near/far
passing dance
to linking
d) Intergroup
relationships
256
MAUREEN CONNOLLY

