AJOB Neuroscience
ISSN: 2150-7740 (Print) 2150-7759 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/uabn20
The Multidimensionality and Context Dependency
of Selves
Leon de Bruin, Roy Dings & Shaun Gallagher
To cite this article: Leon de Bruin, Roy Dings & Shaun Gallagher (2017) The
Multidimensionality and Context Dependency of Selves, AJOB Neuroscience, 8:2, 112-114, DOI:
10.1080/21507740.2017.1320327
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/21507740.2017.1320327
Published online: 16 Jun 2017.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 130
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=uabn20

compulsive disorder patients: In-depth interviews with 18 patients.
PLoS ONE 10(8):e0135524. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0135524
de Haan, S., E. Rietveld, M. Stokhof, and D. Denys. 2017. Becom-
ing more oneself? Changes in personality following DBS treatment
for psychiatric disorders: Experiences of OCD patients and gen-
eral considerations. PLoS ONE. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0175748
Gilbert, F., E. Goddard, J. N. M. Via~na, A. Carter, and M. Horne.
2017. I miss being me: Phenomenological effects of deep brain
stimulation. AJOB Neuroscience 8(2):96-109.
Johansson, V., M. Garwicz, M. Kanje, J. Schouenborg, A.
Tingstr€om, and U. G€orman. 2011. Authenticity, depression,
and deep brain stimulation. Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience
5(21):1-3.
Kraemer, F. 2013. Me, myself and my brain implant: Deep brain
stimulation raises questions of personal authenticity and alien-
ation. Neuroethics 6(3):483-497.
Mackenzie, C., and M. Walker. 2015. Neurotechnologies, personal
identity, and the ethics of authenticity. In Handbook of neuroethics, ed. J.
Clausen and N. Levy, 373-92. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer.
Sch€upbach, M., M. Gargiulo, M. L. Welter, et al. 2006. Neurosur-
gery in Parkinson disease: A distressed mind in a repaired body?
Neurology 66(12):1811-16. doi:10.1212/01.wnl.0000234880.51322.16
The Multidimensionality and Context
Dependency of Selves
Leon de Bruin, Free University Amsterdam
Roy Dings, Radboud University Nijmegen
Shaun Gallagher, University of Memphis
Gilbert and colleagues (2017) argue that self-estrangement
following DBS treatment seems to be associated with cer-
tain "common qualitative characters": a loss of control,
which reﬂects a deteriorative estrangement, and a dis-
torted perception of capacities, which reveals a restorative
estrangement. Although we are sympathetic to their call
for more research on the phenomenological changes fol-
lowing DBS, we worry that their concept of "self" is too
narrow or minimal for a sufﬁcient understanding of
these changes.
Following Strawson (2011), Gilbert and colleagues con-
ceptualize the self as "the subject of one's phenomenologi-
cal experience of X (e.g., X being an emotion, perception,
thought, etc.)." They do this in order to "justify looking at
the subjective experiences of DBS implementation."
The problem with this Strawsonian concept of self is
that it offers a very limited understanding of the main ﬁnd-
ings of the authors, namely, that self-estrangement follow-
ing DBS treatment seems to be associated with a loss of
control and a distorted perception of capacities. In our
view, these "common qualitative characters" are (1) intri-
cately related to other aspects of the self, and (2) dependent
on the context in which the self is situated. However, a
Strawsonian concept of self fails to capture either the con-
nections or the context (Gallagher and Marcel 1999, 19).
Therefore, we propose that a pattern theory of self (PTS)
will better account for the ﬁndings of Gilbert and col-
leagues. According to PTS, a self consists of a pattern of
dynamically related characteristic features or aspects (Gal-
lagher 2013; Dings and De Bruin 2014; 2016). We next
show that PTS not only does more justice to the way in
which the authors try to explain their ﬁndings, but also
allows us to account for the full range of DBS-induced
changes.
THE PATTERN THEORY OF SELF
A core component of PTS is the acknowledgment that
selves are multidimensional: Any given self may consist of
a variety of aspects, including (but not limited to) minimal
experiential aspects and minimal embodied aspects, but
also affective, intersubjective, cognitive, narrative, and
extended/situated aspects (Gallagher 2013). Importantly,
this is not meant as an additive list of factors, but as com-
ponents dynamically interrelated in a pattern or gestalt
arrangement. Adjustments in one aspect will lead, via
dynamical interactions, to modulations in others. For
example, very basic aspects of self-experience can be mod-
ulated by more complex, relational aspects, such as social,
normative factors that involve culture, gender, race, and so
on, and by speciﬁc intersubjective factors that can either
diminish or enhance one's sense of agency.
Although PTS individuates selves as patterns of char-
acteristic aspects, none of these aspects is necessary or suf-
ﬁcient for the existence of a particular self. In regard to
human actions, for example, it is typically the case that one
Address correspondence to Leon de Bruin, Faculty of Humanities, De Boelelaan 1105, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands. E-mail:
lcdebruin@gmail.com
AJOB Neuroscience
112
ajob Neuroscience
April-June, Volume 8, Number 2, 2017

experiences a degree of agency—a sense of agency that
involves control over one's own body when acting—typi-
cally accompanied by a sense of ownership or "mineness"
for one's body and actions (Gallagher 2000). In disorders
such as schizophrenia, however, a sense of agency or own-
ership for one's action may be missing. Alternatively, as in
cases of amnesia and Alzheimer's disease, one might lose
the cognitive ability to recall one's past life, and may
undergo character or personality changes. In such cases
one's self-identity may continue, supported by bodily and
experiential elements, as well as by intersubjective rela-
tions and/or extended aspects in a stable environment.
This is not to say that such changes do not result in a mod-
ulation of self-experience or self-identity, but rather, since
self is not reducible to any one of these aspects, it is a mod-
ulation of the pattern, rather than a complete loss of self.
Accordingly, there may be various disorders or states of
existence associated with the loss or disruption of each of
these elements, respectively.
A further assumption of PTS is that the pattern of char-
acteristic aspects that constitutes a speciﬁc self can be indi-
viduated
by
contextualizing
these
aspects,
and
by
highlighting how each of them is inﬂuenced by situational
factors (Dings and De Bruin 2016). According to PTS, then,
self-patterns are the result of a dynamic interaction
between various self-aspects and the (social) environment.
Moreover, the conﬁguration of a pattern, in which particu-
lar self-aspects take different values, is itself a context-
dependent process. To illustrate, when in a demanding
social environment, intersubjective and affective aspects of
an individual may come to the fore. In contrast, in a work
or academic context, cognitive/psychological rather than
affective factors may play a more important role, whereas
in his or her private life, the opposite may be the case.
Thus, when someone transitions from a work environment
to her home environment, we could describe this in terms
of a changing self-pattern motivated by a changing con-
text. "At the same time, however, certain aspects of the self
may turn out to be more stable or robust across different
contexts.
Perhaps
someone's
cognitive/psychological
aspects are more pronounced than his affective aspects
regardless of whether we situate this person in the aca-
demic context or his private life" (Dings and De Bruin
2016, 160).
RECONSIDERING THE FINDINGS OF GILBERT AND
COLLEAGUES
Importantly, there is much in Gilbert and colleagues (2017)
that underscores the importance of the multidimensional-
ity and context dependency of selves, and that reads as an
invitation to apply the pattern theory we described in the
previous section. Moreover, use of PTS here will enrich the
interpretation offered by the authors, and, in addition,
shed more light on the empirical data.
For example, many patient reports refer to aspects of
the self that are absent from a Strawsonian perspective,
such as behavioral, embodied, emotional, social, and
narrative aspects.1 According to Gilbert and colleagues,
these ﬁndings are best interpreted in terms of a loss of con-
trol, which reﬂects a deteriorative estrangement, and a dis-
torted perception of capacities, which reveals a restorative
estrangement. However, a loss of control and a distorted
perception of capacities cannot be understood in isolation
from other aspects of the self. For instance, both are closely
related to one's sense of agency, which includes prereﬂec-
tive as well as reﬂective aspects, relating to, for example,
embodiment (motor control processes) and narrative
(reﬂective evaluation), as well as situated (task related to
skill) elements (cf. Gallagher 2012).
Moreover, several patient reports refer to interactions
between the patient and his or her environment, and thus to
the context dependency of the self. For example, patients 04,
07, and 09 claim that they experience the effects of the DBS
treatment ﬁrst and foremost in their activities. Another patient
discovers that he forgot to turn on the DBS only at the moment
he experienced difﬁculty typing. Also, there are patients (e.g.,
03 and 04) who remark that the effects of DBS become particu-
larly noticeable in their social interactions. Again, it seems
strange to interpret these reports without paying attention to
the importance of patient-world interactions. Frankly, we do
not see how one could even experience a loss of control and a
distorted perception of capacities if not in interaction with the
world and/or with others.
Finally, the generic questions used in the interviews
with patients (see appendix to the target article) also seem
to presuppose the multidimensionality and context depen-
dency of the self. For example, they ask about how the
patient's life is affected by DBS, and inquire about the
social and temporal context of the DBS procedure. How
can we interpret the answers to these questions using a
Strawsonian minimal concept of self that fails to reference
social context or narrative?
CONCLUSION
In this commentary we have identiﬁed a tension in the arti-
cle by Gilbert and colleagues: On the one hand, the authors
adopt a very minimal Strawsonian concept of self. On the
other hand, the patient reports they present and the conclu-
sions they draw on the basis of these reports seem to favor
a broader (i.e., multidimensional) and context-dependent
notion of self. We have proposed that the pattern theory of
self might offer the best means to solve this tension.
FUNDING
Roy Dings gratefully acknowledges funding by the Nether-
lands Organisation for Scientiﬁc Research (grant 36020360). &
1. To illustrate, consider Patient 11, who reports "emotional incon-
tinence" and being more sensitive. Narrative aspects seem to play
a role to the extent that patients differ in the meaning they ascribe
to the illness (in relation to their self) and to the DBS device (in
relation to their body).
Phenomenological Effects of DBS
April-June, Volume 8, Number 2, 2017
ajob Neuroscience
113

REFERENCES
Dings, R., and L. C. de Bruin. 2014. Going beyond mind-body
dualism requires revising the self. AJOB Neuroscience 5(4):48-50.
Dings, R., and L. C. de Bruin. 2016. Situating the self: Understand-
ing the effects of deep brain stimulation. Phenomenology and the
Cognitive Sciences 15(2):151-65.
Gallagher, S. 2000. Philosophical conceptions of the self: Implica-
tions for cognitive science. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 4(1):14-21.
Gallagher, S. 2012. Multiple aspects in the sense of agency. New
Ideas in Psychology 30(1):15-31.
Gallagher, S. 2013. A pattern theory of self. Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience 7:443.
Gallagher, S., and A. J. Marcel. 1999. The self in contextualized
action. Journal of Consciousness Studies 6(4):4-30.
Gilbert, F., E. Goddard, J. N. M. Via~na, A. Carter, and M. Horne.
2017. I miss being me: Phenomenological effects of deep brain
stimulation. AJOB Neuroscience 8(2):96-109.
Strawson, G. 2011. The minimal subject. In The Oxford handbook of
the self, ed. S. Gallagher, 253-78. Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press.
Does DBS Alienate Identity or Does It
Simply Fail to Restore Identity Already
Eroded by Illness?
Anke Snoek, Maastricht University
Qualitative studies on new treatments give us important
insights into how patients experience a treatment, and
how the treatment either improves or disrupts their lives.
Gilbert and colleagues' study (Gilbert et al. 2017) is a valu-
able contribution to the phenomenological literature on
how deep brain stimulation (DBS) as a treatment for
Parkinson's disease (PD) can inﬂuence people's self-con-
cept. However, there is insufﬁcient detail about the lives of
their respondents in this fascinating study. This context is
needed to better interpret the authors' results, and will
clarify some of the methodological and theoretical issues
they outline.
The ﬁrst issue that arises is how we should understand
self-estrangement in the context of DBS. Although the
authors provocatively title their article "I Miss Being Me,"
suggesting
that
DBS
induces
self-estrangement,
the
authors outline that this link is only weakly supported. To
start with, less than half (47%) of their respondents experi-
enced some sort of self-estrangement. These eight respond-
ents also described how their symptoms of PD devastated
their existence. Before their DBS they already experienced
self-estrangement. Thus, it seems less likely that DBS indu-
ces self-estrangement, but instead that DBS fails to restore
an identity already eroded by illness. Other studies on
identity change in PD support this conclusion (Nijhof
2002; Roger and Medved 2010; Platt 2004).
Four respondents stated that PD enhanced their lives;
these four also experienced identity continuity after DBS.
However, very few details are given about this group.
Why did they experience PD as enhancing their lives? Did
the PD result in a much-wanted early retirement? Apart
from some basic details like gender, age, and some treat-
ment history, we know nothing about the respondents.
How did PD inﬂuence their lives, their projects, their
relationships? What in their lives did they hope that DBS
would change?
Answering these questions is essential for interpreting
the authors' category of "restorative self-estrangement."
An interesting ﬁnding of the article is that even if DBS
restores the capacities destroyed by PD, the patients can
still experience self-estrangement. This self-estrangement
is due to a side effect of the DBS, which the respondents
call "emotional incontinence." Gilbert and colleagues do
not explore why this emotional incontinence is so estrang-
ing for the respondents. However, Baumeister and col-
leagues have shown that emotions play a very important
role in our decision making (Tice, Bratslavsky, and Bau-
meister 2001). Gilbert and colleagues cite Mackenzie and
Walker (2015), stating, "The question is not whether DBS
intervention threatens identity, but whether the interven-
tion impairs autonomy competence (e.g., volitional/emo-
tional/motivational/imaginative skills)" (102). But they
explain
very
little
about
the
respondents
capacities:
Which capacities are restored? Which of the capacities
that are eroded by PD fail to be restored by DBS? Which
previously intact capacities are impaired by DBS? I ﬁnd
the category "restorative estrangement" somewhat mis-
leading because the estrangement does not come from the
restoration of capacity, but from the destruction of other
capacities.
Address correspondence to Anke Snoek, Maastricht University, Faculty of Health, Medicine & Life Sciences, Peter Debyeplein 1, 6229
HA Maastricht, The Netherlands. E-mail: a.snoek@maastrichtuniversity.nl
AJOB Neuroscience
114
ajob Neuroscience
April-June, Volume 8, Number 2, 2017

