British Journal for the History of Philosophy
ISSN: 0960-8788 (Print) 1469-3526 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rbjh20
Inference by Analogy and the Progress of
Knowledge: From Reﬂection to Determination in
Judgements of Natural Purpose
Preston Stovall
To cite this article: Preston Stovall (2015) Inference by Analogy and the Progress of Knowledge:
From Reﬂection to Determination in Judgements of Natural Purpose, British Journal for the
History of Philosophy, 23:4, 681-709, DOI: 10.1080/09608788.2015.1044889
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/09608788.2015.1044889
Published online: 09 Jun 2015.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 392
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rbjh20

ARTICLE
INFERENCE BY ANALOGY AND THE PROGRESS OF
KNOWLEDGE: FROM REFLECTION TO
DETERMINATION IN JUDGEMENTS OF NATURAL
PURPOSE1
Preston Stovall
In this paper, I argue that Darwin's On the Origin of Species can
be interpreted as the culmination of an extended exercise of what
Kant called 'the reﬂecting power of judgement' that issued in a form
of reasoning that Hegel associates with inference by analogy and
that Peirce associates with hypothesis and later assimilates to
abduction. After some exegetical and rationally reconstructive work,
I support this reading by (1) showing that Darwin's theory of natural
selection gave us a way of understanding the purposive character
of organic generation and growth that does not rely on an analogy
with intentional agency and (2) outlining some of the uses to which
this new understanding was put in reasoning about mind and society
by American intellectuals in the second half of the nineteenth
century. In the process I hope to shed some light on the relationship
between mechanistic and purposive explanation in judgements of
nature.
KEYWORDS: American pragmatism; German idealism; teleological
explanations in biology; conceptual change
I. PURPOSIVE AND MECHANISTIC EXPLANATION
In this paper I reconstruct a line of thought in nineteenth-century German and
American philosophy. My central contention is that Darwin's On the Origin
of Species can be interpreted as an extended exercise of what Kant called
'the reﬂecting power of judgement' culminating in a form of reasoning
that Hegel associates with inference by analogy and that Peirce associates
1Thanks are owed to Robert Brandom and Edouard Machery for discussion about the material
contained in this paper. This work was supported by an American Council of Learned
Societies Dissertation Completion Fellowship.
British Journal for the History of Philosophy, 2015
Vol. 23, No. 4, 681-709, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09608788.2015.1044889
© 2015 BSHP

with abduction or hypothesis.2 In the process of defending this reading I will
argue that Darwin's theory of natural selection gave us a new way of thinking
about organic purposes. More speciﬁcally, after canvassing Kant's treatment
of judgements of natural purpose I will argue that Darwin's Origin reoriented
our understanding of purposive traits around a retrospective account of their
origin and away from explanations modelled (on analogy with intentional
agency) by a prospective focus on the representations of future states as cau-
sally guiding those traits' activities. As a result of the explanatory resources
made available by Darwin's retrospective account of organic purposes it
became possible to use this new form of understanding as a means of reason-
ing analogically about mind and society, thereby reorienting Kant's con-
ception of the analogical relationship between organic purpose and
intentional agency. In defence of this latter claim I will show that
Darwin's theories were applied by American intellectuals to domains of
intentional purpose throughout the second half of the nineteenth century,
and that on the resulting view certain problems concerning the relationship
between mechanistic and purposive explanation are dissolved. I begin with
an overview of these problems before outlining the rest of the paper.
Though Kant's particular conception of mechanism and purpose will be in
focus later, the discussion here is meant to reﬂect a more general tension
between mechanistic and purposive explanation that is not particular to Kant.
Without our using the causal powers of objects in interaction with one
another as points of cognitive friction along which to track those objects
as enduring existents the world would appear to us as nothing but 'one
great blooming, buzzing confusion', to use James's memorable phrase for
the state of mind the infant has at birth. Whatever else it must involve, the
identiﬁcation and individuation of spatio-temporal objects turns on our
ability to track the powers those objects would and would not exhibit as
they make their way in the world - to be without a grasp of the space of
possibility surrounding an object is to be without an understanding of that
object as the kind of thing it is. Mechanistic or efﬁcient causal explanation
is the paradigm of this cognitive activity. These explanations proceed by
subsuming the processes of an object under regularities that the object
itself, to put the point somewhat metaphorically, is indifferent towards.
Final or purposive explanation seems to involve a different sort of under-
standing of the relationship between an object, its parts, and the activities
characteristic of its kind. As it concerns the purposes of organic generation
and growth this point can be put (in the material mode) by saying that the
2Though in his early work Peirce uses his theory of the syllogistic ﬁgures to derive deductive,
inductive, and hypothetical forms of inference, in his later work tends to replace talk of
hypothesis with talk of abduction (sometimes using the term 'retroduction') as the third primi-
tive form of reasoning. See the discussion at pages 94-7 of 'On the Logic of Drawing History'
and pages 205-6 of 'The Three Normative Sciences'; for evidence of continuity see page 95 of
the former, where Peirce asserts that an abductive inference is brought off by the adoption of a
hypothesis.
682
PRESTON STOVALL

organism is a uniﬁed locus of powers that variously ward off and appropriate
the causal forces around it towards the maintenance of its continuing exist-
ence as the kind of thing that it is and the perpetuation of its kind.
Consider, for instance, the variety of environmental factors that would and
would not inﬂuence the behaviour of a tomato plant in one's backyard over the
course of a summer as contrasted with the tendencies that govern the behav-
iour of the bag of charcoal under the porch. The tomato plant is a unity whose
parts interact with the forces of its environment in complex ways, using those
forces in the generation of its various functions so as to stave off its demise,
fuel its growth, and propagate its kind. While the bag of charcoal would
sustain a sizable ﬂame for a while if ignited, its activities are far less integrated
with those of its environment. The environmental forces of weather and the
elements will tend to degrade the bag and its contents, particularly if subjected
to frequent alternating bouts of rain and sunshine; contrast this with the inﬂu-
ence such forces have on the tomato plant. Because organic self-identity and
the perpetuation of its kind is that towards which we take the organism's pro-
cesses to be tending towards, while in our thought about inorganic activity no
such subordination of part to whole occurs, the concept of an organic thing's
kind or species is organizationally prior to our understanding of the individ-
ual's causal processes in a way that is not at home in our thought about the
objects of inanimate nature. Whereas efﬁcient causal explanations underwrite
conceptions of objects as merely subject to whatever laws determine our
understanding of them, an attribution of ﬁnal causal process invokes a prin-
ciple of reasoning on which the individual's self- and species-maintenance
act as foci in coordinating our understanding of the mechanistic forces of
nature, for the thing seems to be the sort of thing that uses those forces as
means towards its survival and the perpetuation of its kind.
And now it can seem as though a mechanistic explanation rules out a purpo-
sive one and vice versa. For if we can understand purposive activity in terms of
the efﬁcient operations of such things as chemical gradients and mechanisms of
cell replication then it may look as if the teleological understanding through
which we formerly came to interpret that activity is otiose, an idle pulley spin-
ning at no purpose in a machine of efﬁcient causation. While tempting, and
perhaps pathologically so for the modern mind, I do not think this entailment
is forced on us. First, the role of purposive explanation in so much as individu-
ating a thing as organic looks to make the reduction of ﬁnal to efﬁcient causes
quixotic. Only a sort of saturnine insanity could hope to eradicate purpose from
our understanding of living systems after having expended so much effort in
using purpose to frame that understanding to begin with. Still, this might be
thought a mere limitation of the human capacity for cognition, or a holdover
from more primitive worldviews. Either way the question concerning whether
efﬁcient and ﬁnal explanations are in-principle incompatible requires careful
treatment, and I propose we resolutely think through the difﬁculties that efﬁcient
and ﬁnal causes seem to ﬁt us with. Towards that end we do well to help our-
selves to conversation with the thoughts that others have had about this matter.
INFERENCE BY ANALOGY AND THE PROGRESS OF KNOWLEDGE
683

The rest of the paper is structured as follows. I begin with some exegetical
and rationally reconstructive groundwork in Sections II and III, taking the
lead from Paul Redding's 'Hegel and Peircean Abduction'. Redding
suggests that Kant's notion of reﬂecting judgement as a moment of
concept formation lies at the back of Hegel's third ﬁgure syllogism, corre-
sponding to hypothetical inference in Peirce's exposition of the syllogistic
ﬁgures. I develop this reading by arguing that Hegel's discussion of infer-
ence by analogy can be understood as the description of a process of concep-
tual revision that Peirce associates with the abductive stage of inquiry and
which bears some resemblance to Kant's talk of reﬂection. This will put
us in a position to consider Darwin's On the Origin of Species as an abduc-
tive inference or hypothesis resulting from an extended period in which the
reﬂective power of judgement was in operation. The remainder of the paper
considers Darwin's work, and the details surrounding its production and cri-
tique, in an effort to defend this reading. After summarizing Kant's treatment
of teleology in the Critique of the Power of Judgment in Section IV, in
Section V, I canvass some of the historical development leading up to the
projects in natural taxonomy that were underway during the time Darwin
was formulating his theory. In Section VI, I suggest a reading on which
Darwin's work can be understood on the model of the rational reconstruction
given at the start of the paper, and in Section VII, I show that Darwin's
theory was put to use by American philosophers precisely towards the end
of revising our understanding of mind and society in light of the new
biology. On this basis I will argue that Darwin was able to show us how
to think of purpose and mechanism in a way that Kant did not have the
resources for. The point of providing this reading is to establish that the
theory of conceptual development drawn together in Sections II and III
supplies resources for deepening our understanding of the signiﬁcance of
Darwin's hypothesis, while at the same time using Darwin's Origin as a
case study for vindicating that reading of Kant, Hegel, and Peirce as an
account of some of the processes of conceptual development. And at that
point we will return to a consideration of the relationship between purposive
and mechanistic explanation with a different view of the terrain.
II. BACKGROUND: THE DETERMINING AND REFLECTING
POWERS OF JUDGEMENT
The idea of a reﬂecting power of judgement appears in Kant's logic, where it
forms a moment in concept-formation (Vienna Logic, 24:909ff; Jäsche
Logic, 9:94-5; both reprinted in Kant's Lectures on Logic). But the reﬂecting
power of judgement comes into its own in the third Critique. Whereas the
determining power of judgement operates by subsuming an individual
given in sensibility under a concept from the understanding, reﬂection is
called into operation without a determinate concept with which to guide
684
PRESTON STOVALL

the imagination's synthesis of the content given in intuition. Instead, in an
exercise of the reﬂecting power of judgement the cognizing subject is con-
fronted with an object (or a set of objects being compared) and searches
for a concept to comprehend it (them). The operation of this power of judge-
ment is paradigmatic of certain sorts of experiences for Kant, including those
of beauty and of the sublime. It also plays an important role in scientiﬁc
inquiry, as there it underwrites attributions of purpose to the activities of
organic things. In all such judgements, Kant thinks, certain conceptual short-
comings force the mind into a reﬂective stance. In the case of teleological jud-
gements of nature Kant thinks that while we are always under an obligation to
use mechanistic explanation in treating of anything in space and time, we are
sometimes unable to fulﬁl this obligation (5:386-8; 5:417-8). The activities
of organic things are riven with such manifest coordination in maintaining
the life of the organism and propagating the species that we are forced to
turn to purposive explanation. In doing so, we reason as if the thing in question
is designed by an artiﬁcer, as if its activities exhibit the purposes they do
because it was designed with those purposes in mind. The reﬂecting power
of judgement is operative here because, Kant emphasizes, we are not saying
of the object that it is purposively organized; we are instead merely adopting
this purposive frame by analogy with agency for our understanding of the
organism. Purposive explanation of the organic world for Kant is incompati-
ble with a mechanistic explanation of it, and though we are ever obliged to
pursue mechanistic explanation, the complexity of the organic forces us to
reason as if its organic activities were the result of intentional agency.
III. HEGEL AND PEIRCE ON SYLLOGISTIC INFERENCE
There is a tendency to think of immediately apprehended contents of cogni-
tion, episodes of knowing that are not mediated by the drawing of an infer-
ence from some other content, as a watermark for epistemic certainty. This is
not Hegel's view. Instead of supposing that the immediacy of certain judge-
ments is a sign of their epistemic privilege, Hegel thinks of this immediacy is
an artefact of our ability to reason with that content. And so for Hegel we
must turn to inference if we are to query a judgement's epistemic bona ﬁdes.
It is altogether a subjective reﬂection that splits the connection of the terms into
isolated premises and a conclusion distinct from them ... It is mostly because of
this subjective attire that the inference appears as a subjective expedient in
which reason or understanding takes refuge when they are incapable of immedi-
ate cognition ... This rationality is not an expedient; on the contrary, in contrast
to the immediacy of the connection that still obtains in judgment, it is the objec-
tive element; it is the prior immediacy of cognition that rather is mere subjec-
tivity, in contrast to the syllogistic inference which is the truth of the judgment.
(Science of Logic, 12:94-5, 592-3)
INFERENCE BY ANALOGY AND THE PROGRESS OF KNOWLEDGE
685

On this view determinately contentful concepts are not given to us in judge-
ments partitioned out atomically; instead, their content arises through the
processes of reasoning by which we struggle to understand the world.
In the course of working out this line of thought in the Science of Logic
Hegel puts forth his interpretation of the syllogism.3 Paul Redding has
shown that Hegel's discussion of the syllogistic ﬁgures corresponds in
many ways to Peirce's discussion of the syllogistic ﬁgures (e.g. Peirce,
'Deduction, Induction, and Hypothesis'), and in my 'Abductive Inference',
I have shown that the types of reasoning associated with the non-deductive
syllogisms affects the content of the concepts occurring within them in
speciﬁc ways.4 Hegel treats these three ﬁgures under various guises, but
for the purposes of rational reconstruction I will proceed by considering
instances where the Hegelian concepts for singular things (S), particularity
(P), and universality (U) are regimented as singular terms, kind terms, and
predicates (as we will see below, Hegel's association of the third ﬁgure
with inference by analogy will require some additional commentary):
Hegel's ﬁrst ﬁgure: SPU (deduction)
(1) SP
(1) This rod is made of metal
(2) PU
(2) Metal things conduct electricity
(3) SU
(3) This rod conducts electricity
Hegel's second ﬁgure: PSU (induction)
(1) SP
(1) This rod is made of metal
(2) SU
(2) This rod conducts electricity
(3) PU
(3) Metal things conduct electricity
Hegel's third ﬁgure: SUP (hypothesis)
(1) SU
(1) This rod conducts electricity
(2) UP
(2) Metal things conduct electricity
(3) SP
(3) This rod is made of metal
Notice that each of the ﬁgures is arrived at by having one of these concepts
play the role of the middle term. And while the deductive ﬁgure merely
makes explicit a conceptual relation that was implicit in a set of premises,
inductive and hypothetical inferences result in conclusions that, if accepted
by a community, change the content of the terms occurring within them. To
3The details of the development of Hegel's theory of the syllogism is not well known. For
some discussion see Harris's 'General Introduction' to Hegel (Jena System, 1804-5).
4I am currently working on a paper that goes into these relations in more detail.
686
PRESTON STOVALL

infer that metal things conduct electricity on the basis of the observation (or a
series of them) that singular metal things conduct electricity is to institute a
new rule linking the kind term 'metal' and the predicate 'conducts electri-
city'. To hypothetically infer that a rod is metal on the basis of its disposition
to conduct electricity, by contrast, is to broaden one's commitments concern-
ing what that rod would and would not do, commitments implied by the kind
term 'metal'. In this case no new inferential link between a kind term and a
predicate is instituted. Though the inference does increase the extension of
the term 'metal' by the referent of 'this rod', and though it implicitly attri-
butes all of the predicates contained in 'metal' to the term 'this rod', that
inference does not change our understanding of what it is to be metal.
Hegel associates third ﬁgure inference with inference by analogy at
12:115-18 (614-7) of the Science of Logic and §190 of the Encyclopedia
Logic. In both works Hegel gives the following as an example of analogical
inference:
.
The earth has inhabitants;
.
The moon is an earth;
.
Therefore the moon has inhabitants.
In both cases he writes that the middle term is an individual thing (the earth)
which is understood in terms of its kind; it is 'taken as something concrete
which, in truth, is just as much a universal nature or genus as it is a singular
[thing]' (Science of Logic 12:117, 615; cf. Encyclopedia Logic §190). This is
what Hegel has to say about analogy in the Zusätze to §190 of the Encyclo-
pedia Logic:
In the syllogism of analogy it is concluded that because things of a certain
kind have a certain property, therefore other things of the same kind have
the same property, too ... .[Analogy] is the instinct of reason which surmises
that this or that empirically discovered determination is grounded in an
object's inner nature or kind, and which proceeds on that basis.
Analogical reasoning has been a topic of logical investigation since the
time of the ancient Greeks, but in the contemporary setting research into
the subject was shaped by interest in the use of analogy in scientiﬁc expla-
nations (cf. Hesse, 'Operational Deﬁnition'; Models and Analogies in
Science; Structure of Inference; and Bartha, By Parallel Reasoning), and
particularly in building models in artiﬁcial intelligence and cognitive
science (cf. the anthologies of Helman, Analogical Reasoning; Gentner
et al., Analogical Mind).5 In reasoning by analogy one sets up a mapping
5For a discussion of the stages of analogical reasoning in the cognitive science literature, see
Burstein, 'Combining Analogies in Mental Models', 179-80; Thagard, 'Dimensions of
Analogy', 105-24, 107ff; Gentner and Colhoun, 'Analogical Processes; and Gentner and
INFERENCE BY ANALOGY AND THE PROGRESS OF KNOWLEDGE
687

of categorial resources from one domain into another and speciﬁes a com-
mentary on that mapping to guide its use, with the result that the forms of
understanding employed in reasoning about the ﬁrst domain can be used
to interpret the other. Following Bartha (By Parallel Reasoning), call the
ﬁrst domain the source and the domain to be interpreted the target. The ana-
logical mapping and its commentary permits us to extend the analogical
source's categorial relations into a new domain, and in the process modify
those relations so as to ﬁt the peculiar features of the target domain.
Kinds and properties play different roles in hypothetical inference (as I
have reconstructed it) and inference by analogy. In the hypothetical syllo-
gism a property (conducting electricity) is used to infer membership in a
kind (being metal), while in the inference by analogy being of a common
kind (a planet or earth) is used to infer possession of some property (being
inhabited). These different roles correspond to differences in the way the
inferences in question affect the content of the concepts occurring within
them. While third ﬁgure syllogism as reconstructed above has the effect of
enlarging a kind term's sphere of extension (the individuals it ranges over)
and so potentially explaining some property that an individual exhibits, it
does not tell us anything new about the inferential link between the kind
and that property. After all, we must rely on a pre-existing link as a rule
in making that inference. Things are otherwise when we analogically infer
a property on the basis of a kind, however. For the conclusion of an analo-
gical inference of this form is a hypothesis that, if veriﬁed in a range of cases,
permits one to make an induction over those cases to the establishment of a
rule or generalization that links the property and the kind together, thereby
enriching our understanding of what it means to be a member of that kind.
To infer that some planet is inhabited because another (similar) one is inhab-
ited is to set up a potential test for a new rule linking 'being a planet (of a
certain sort)' with 'having inhabitants'. So reconstructed, this process of ana-
logical reasoning is rather like that which Peirce came to associate with
inquiry. In his mature thought inquiry is divided into three stages: inquiry
begins with an abductive inference or hypothesis that aims to explain
some puzzling fact; one then deduces consequences that follow from that
abductive inference; and in the third stage one looks to see whether those
consequences obtain and takes an induction over the results.6 Finally,
notice that reasoning by analogy relies heavily on reﬂection: we must
compare two different kinds of thing, discern some set of underlying simi-
larities, abstract a general form of reasoning about one domain (the
source), and apply it to the other (the target) together with a commentary
concerning which aspects of the similarity are relevant for reasoning from
Smith, 'Analogical Reasoning', 131-4. For Hesse's account, see pages 57-100 of her Models
and Analogies In Science. Bartha's analysis is given in Chapter 4 of his By Parallel
Reasoning.
6Cf. Peirce, 'On the Logic of Drawing History', especially 94-7.
688
PRESTON STOVALL

source to target. It would seem, then, that inference by analogy as the crea-
tive expansion of our understanding into new domains by employing and
reworking old forms of understanding is just the sort of thing that Kantian
reﬂection is concerned with.
The above discussion suggests that some of the processes of conceptual
development can be understood through a line of thinking that takes us
from Kant to Peirce through Hegel. In this way that discussion stands as a
proposal for interpretation, a hypothesis concerning how to think about
Kantian reﬂection, inference by analogy, and abductive reasoning as they
are used in inquiry. For that hypothesis to be supported as a proposal for
interpreting the processes of conceptual development, however, we would
need to ﬁnd some instance of this sort of development having occurred in
intellectual history. Showing that there has been conceptual development
of this sort would thereby support that proposal as a claim about how reﬂec-
tion, abduction, and inference by analogy affect our understanding of the
world. In the next three sections, I will argue that the Darwinian understand-
ing of organic purpose, as contrasted with the conception on offer from Kant,
exhibits just such a case of reﬂective/abductive conceptual development. For
in Kant the analogical understanding set up between intentional agency and
organic generation and growth is source to target, while Darwin allowed us
to reconceive the categorial frame within which we understand natural pur-
poses, thereby opening up the possibility of using that reconception of
organic activity as a model for explaining other domains. Darwin's work
was the culmination of generations of data collection and creative hypothe-
sizing concerning biological classiﬁcation, and one consequence of his
theory was that the explanatory resources of natural selection (source)
could be applied to domains of intentional agency (target), reversing that
analogical relationship as compared to the Kantian order of understanding.
As this is just the sort of conceptual revision one would expect if
Darwin's hypothesis were an abductive inference resulting from an exercise
of the reﬂecting power of judgement developed along the lines above, to
establish that Darwin's hypothesis had this effect on our understanding of
the organic world (and our place in it) is to establish some support for the
account of conceptual development outlined in Sections II and III. This
reading of Darwin vis à vis Kant, Hegel, and Peirce will bring the discussion
back around to the issue of efﬁcient and ﬁnal causality that opened this
paper, now with a more nuanced understanding of the roles these concepts
have come to play in different sorts of explanation.
IV. KANTIAN TELEOLOGY
There are three elements in Kant's account of natural purpose that I want to
distinguish and discuss. First, there is its use of end-directedness as a way of
understanding a thing's parts in terms of the functions they serve in relation
INFERENCE BY ANALOGY AND THE PROGRESS OF KNOWLEDGE
689

to a whole organism (5:373-6; 5:408-9; 5:417-21). Second, there is purpo-
sive explanation as causal explanation (5:359-61; 5:369-75; 5:386-8;
5:408-9; 5:440). Finally, natural purpose is understood as an intentional
causality, modelled by analogy with the creation of artefacts (5:373-5;
5:390; 5:398; 5:420-1; 5:441-2; 5:464-5).
Use of purpose in explanation commits one to a certain kind of part-whole
analysis of an object. Kant sometimes puts this point by saying that organic
things - objects with natural ends - are such that their parts are possible 'only
through their relation to the whole' (5:373). Kant goes on to write that 'the
thing itself is an end, and is thus comprehended under a concept or an idea
that must determine a priori everything that is to be contained in it'. It is this
unity of the whole organism as explanatorily prior to the operation of its parts
that is characteristic of organic identity for Kant. The activity of an organic
thing within its environment is intelligible to us only insofar as we take that
activity to be directed towards the maintenance of the organism as a whole
(and, through its reproductive activities, directed towards the continuation of
its species). The organic whole, the unity that is the organism, stands as a
point of orientation around which we interpret the activities of the organism.
We express this peculiar sort of part-whole relation with the use of teleologi-
cal operators like 'so that' and 'in order to': the tree exudes sap when cut so
that infection is warded off; the ﬂower whose sunlight is occluded grows
outward in order to reach the sunlight, etc. For Kant the great variety with
which the organic thing responds to, wards off, and appropriates the
causal forces of nature require that we see it as purposive, directed
towards its self-maintenance, in a way out of place in non-organic nature.
Second, it is a hallmark of Kant's discussion of teleology in nature in the
third Critique that teleological explanation is characterized as a form of
causal explanation. But unlike the causes at work in the discussion of the cat-
egories of the ﬁrst Critique, teleological causality applied to organic things is
not, for Kant, a feature of the world that is grounded in the possibility of the
experience of such objects; it is instead a merely subjective principle guiding
our interaction with them. Kant's banishing of teleology from nature stands
in sharp contrast to his understanding of causality more generally. Whereas
causal relations for Kant are transcendental conditions on the possibility of
experience, teleological causes are a crutch our cognition relies on
because of its human limitation (5:386-8; 5:405-10; 5:441). The following
passage is emblematic of Kant's commitments in this vicinity. While he
grants that we are not able to prove that mechanistic explanations cannot
explain the generation of living things, he goes on to write:
However, with respect to our cognitive faculty, it is just as indubitably certain
the mere mechanism of nature is also incapable of providing an explanatory
ground for the generation of organized beings. It is therefore an entirely
correct fundamental principle for the reﬂecting power of judgment that for
the evident connection of things in accordance with ﬁnal causes we must
690
PRESTON STOVALL

conceive of a causality different from mechanism, namely that of an (intelli-
gent) world-cause acting in accordance with ends, no matter how rash and
indemonstrable that would be for the determining power of judgment.
(5:389, emphasis in the original)
Finally, as this passage indicates, Kant understands the purposive causal
powers we attribute to organisms by analogy with the purposive intentional-
ity of an artiﬁcer. The organic thing's activity is so delicately counterpoised
within a variety of environmental forces of change, and its responses so per-
fectly calibrated to see to its continuing survival, growth, and the reproduc-
tion of its species, that we ﬁnd ourselves unable to understand those
processes, and the organism as the kind of thing that it is, without thinking
about its activity as though it were causally directed towards those ends by an
agent who intentionally set it in motion towards them. While Kant wants to
distinguish natural ends from artiﬁcial ones (see, e.g. the discussion at
5:372-4), it remains the case that for Kant a teleological judgement of
natural purpose is modelled by analogy with intentional purpose as the ana-
logical source. And, Kant supposes, our mechanistic causal explanations are
supplanted by ﬁnal causal explanations any time we advert to the latter.
These two causes are mutually exclusive for sublunary creatures. While he
allows that a supersensible intuition, in beings capable of the same, would
perhaps ﬁnd a ground behind both mechanism and teleology sufﬁcient for
thinking them to apply at once to things in themselves, Kant is adamant
that in us such a ground is closed off, and he proscribes any speculation in
that direction (5:400).
All three of these features - the part-whole relationships posited by teleo-
logical explanation, the understanding of teleology as a causal force, and the
interpretation of the purposes of organic things on analogy with the represen-
tation-guided causality of minded agency - are irremediably linked in Kant's
mind.7 Purpose in nature is modelled on purpose in the human domain, in
particular on the creation of artefacts. An artiﬁcer has a design in his
mind, and this design dictates how the work is to unfold - the representation
of the whole, as an end, is what causally guides the operations that result in
that end. Similarly, the behaviour of the organic thing is so carefully counter-
balanced within its environment, appropriating forces around it as external
ends for its own internal regulation and warding off those that would
destroy it, that it would seem as though the concept of the organic thing
7There are, however, places where Kant tentatively broaches the subject of non-intentional
purposes, usually in connection with idealist attempts to make sense of nature - see 5:373,
5:391-5, 5:364-5, 5:419, and 5:439-40. In each case, however, Kant argues that such
attempts are insufﬁcient; they do not
so much as solve the question of the ﬁrst ground of purposiveness as rather nullify it, by
robbing that concept of all its reality and making it into a mere misinterpretation of a
general ontological concept of a thing in general.
(5:439-40)
INFERENCE BY ANALOGY AND THE PROGRESS OF KNOWLEDGE
691

as the kind of thing that it is, as a whole whose parts variously contribute to
its maintenance in the way peculiar to its species, is the ground for the causal
forces at work in the organism. Purposive explanation of organic nature for
Kant is a forward-looking explanation modelled on intentional causal expla-
nation, as if to understand something as purposive just is to understand it in
terms of its later states. The categorial resources Kant uses to make sense of
organic purposives are the categorial resources of intentional agency, in par-
ticular the resources of artefact creation - in Kant, organic activity is an ana-
logical target interpreted from an analogical source of intentional agency.
The key to breaking out of Kant's categorial frame was our coming to
view the genealogical ancestry of organic things, not their individual
futures, as the means of understanding the purposes they bear. In this way
we were able to frame an independent conception of the categorial relations
underwriting attributions of purpose to natural things, one that separated
natural purpose from intentional causality. To come to understand how
this retrospective genealogical understanding of the origin of natural pur-
poses affords a reconceptualization of Kant's prospective intentional under-
standing of that domain, it will help to consider some of the issues
surrounding biological classiﬁcation in the eighteenth and nineteenth centu-
ries as they set the stage for Darwin's contribution.
V. COMPARATIVE ANATOMY AND NATURAL TAXONOMY
Research into physiology and biological classiﬁcation in the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries laid the groundwork for the debates about species ﬁxism
and special origination that occurred during the ﬁrst half of the nineteenth
century. Two ﬁgures were particularly inﬂuential for nineteenth-century pro-
jects in natural taxonomy: the French botanist Joseph Pitton de Tournefort
(1656-708) and the Swiss researcher Carl von Linné (Linnaeus: 1707-78).
Tournefort divided plants into genera by grouping them according to resem-
blances founded on the structure of the parts of a plant ('habits' or 'afﬁ-
nities'). He supposed that the afﬁnities underwriting genus-classiﬁcation
were something like an alphabet of plant characteristics, so that if the biol-
ogist was in possession of the right set of characters and the key to read
them she could determine how to classify plants on the basis of a careful
study and comparison of their parts. Linnaeus, like Tournefort, hoped to
specify a set of impartial characteristics by which to classify plants according
to genus and species.8 Unlike Tournefort, however, Linnaeus proposed to
restrict attention to resemblances between the parts of fructiﬁcation as that
which determines the plant's classiﬁcation. His method proceeded by group-
ing plants into genera and species according the resemblances between their
8See Chapter 3 of Larson, Reason and Experience, for a discussion of Tournefort's inﬂuence
on Linneaus.
692
PRESTON STOVALL

reproductive organs. Linnaeus referred to this as a process of 'collation' (col-
latio). Here is how Staffan Müller-Wille describes the process:
Starting from a single exemplar of a kind, other exemplars judged to belong to
the same kind are adduced and compared with the ﬁrst. All characters
observed to remain 'constant' throughout the set of exemplars are retained
in the deﬁnition of the kind in question - be it a species, a genus or a
'natural order' - while all 'dissenting' characters are excluded from it. Col-
lation is clearly an open process; new material may always require revision
of previous deﬁnitions ... .
('History Redoubled', 535)
While the process of collation involved comparing individual plants against
an ideal standard, that standard itself could change over the course of inquiry
(the term collatio is also used by Bacon in discussion of his inductive method
- see Müller-Wille, 'History Redoubled', 536-7).
Facts surrounding a plant's discovery were catalogued by Linnaeus, but
only as a guide for determining the genealogy of the plant, which was Lin-
naeus's principle of classiﬁcation (Müller-Wille, 'History Redoubled', 533-
5). Like Tournefort he recommends an initial grouping of plants into species
and genera according to their 'habits', but he urges that such grouping must
always be provisional. Instead Linnaeus argues that a systematic classiﬁ-
cation of plants must be founded on the structure of their reproductive
parts (Larson, Reason and Experience, 63-5). Linnaeus reasoned that
because nature favours economy of method and because animals reproduce
via male impregnation of a female egg, plants would also exhibit an analo-
gous sexual dimorphism (Larson, Reason and Experience, 51, 54). Linnaeus
believed that by attending to the structures of reproduction botanists would
thereby come to read the species of the plant - for the aim of the generative
processes of the plant is the production of the next generation of the species,
and this, Linnaeus concluded, meant that the reproductive parts of a plant
were that which the plant itself was directed towards producing.
The tension between respecting pre-existing classiﬁcations and revising
them on the basis of a uniﬁed system is marked in Linnaeus' work
(Larson, Reason and Experience, 66-7, 70-1). He divides botanical classi-
ﬁcation into ﬁve headings - class, order, genus, species, and variety - and
while Linnaeus was convinced that reproductive organs determined classiﬁ-
cation according to species and genus, above the level of genus he seemed
tradition-bound in classifying groupings according to afﬁnities or habits.
Linné's limitation of deﬁnitive characters to the parts of fructiﬁcation made it
impossible for him to discover any relation among genera less artiﬁcial than
his system based upon stamens and pistils, for once above the level of
genera, the representation of afﬁnities rests, as later naturalists demonstrated,
upon a subtle conception of the whole of plant structure.
(Larson, Reason and Experience, 65)
INFERENCE BY ANALOGY AND THE PROGRESS OF KNOWLEDGE
693

Despite these difﬁculties Linnaeus' work, and the methods he employed,
inﬂuenced generations of biologists in Europe. His rejection of a priori
plant classiﬁcation in favour of a detailed examination of the structure of
their reproductive organs, the conviction that the genealogy of the organism
is essential to its identity, the use of exemplars as guides for classiﬁcation,
and his willingness to let the standard of classiﬁcation vary with the collec-
tion of more data, were treated as advances in the scientiﬁc inquiry into
organic taxonomies by those who came after him.
As the eighteenth century progressed much effort was expended in bio-
logical research towards the development of more complete and systemati-
cally organized natural taxonomies. By the beginning of the nineteenth
century greater access to diverse ﬂora and fauna from across the globe,
and a more extensive understanding of geological processes, the age of the
earth, and the existence of ancient species long extinct, put these projects
under increased stress (various theological debates about the origin of the
earth and its species exacerbated the situation in some quarters). But research
into natural taxonomies was invigorated by work, pioneered by Étienne
Geoffroy St.-Hilaire in France and Johann Wolfgang von Goethe in
Germany, using comparative morphology as a guide to species classiﬁcation
(Amundson, Changing Role, 53-6). Much of the debate centred on the
problem of distinguishing morphological features or afﬁnities that were rev-
elatory of common classiﬁcation from those that indicated only a superﬁcial
similarity. This work was substantially developed in application to ver-
tebrates by Richard Owen (1804-92) in Britain in the decades before
Darwin's publication of On the Origin of Species (see Amundson, Changing
Role, Chapter 4 for a discussion of Owen's inﬂuence on Darwin). For Owen,
there were two dimensions along which comparative morphology was to
proceed. On the one hand a researcher would compare the anatomies of
different animals in the interest of uncovering homologues, structures that
were the same between two different species though they performed differ-
ent functions. On the other hand a researcher was to look for analogues, parts
that performed the same function across different organisms without bearing
any structural similarity. In this way Owen hoped to demarcate those mor-
phological similarities that were to guide classiﬁcation from those which
were to be disregarded (for classiﬁcatory purposes). His method turned on
specifying an archetype for each classiﬁcation, an ideal speciﬁcation of
the structural features characteristic of that class.
In the background to this research there lingered conversations concerning
whether species remained ﬁxed or were generated over time, along with
worries about the metaphysical and explanatory dimensions of the apparently
essentialist thinking that one was committed to in these taxonomies. While
the issue as to whether such classiﬁcation was simply an explanatory heuristic
or whether instead it was getting at real divisions of genera, order, etc. remained
a constant battleground, it was generally accepted that at the level of species
there were genuine differences to be discovered. The dominant view
694
PRESTON STOVALL

throughout much of the eighteenth century held that the entirety of the world's
species was created once and for all. But species-ﬁxism was in fact a rather
recent development, and prior to Linnaeus, who argued in detail for ﬁxism,
'beliefs in transmutation and spontaneous generation were extremely wide-
spread' (Amundson, Changing Role, 35). With the turn of the nineteenth
century, however, species ﬁxism was beginning to look more problematic.
The discovery of extinct species in the fossil record, and the recognition that
different species under common genera seem tailor-ﬁt to their respective
environments, led some researchers to suppose that new species were period-
ically generated. This forced biologists to question the ontological mooring
of even species classiﬁcation, and different researchers answered this question
in different ways. Jean-Baptiste Lamarck (1744-829), of course, was one ﬁgure
who defended species creation; William Buckland (1784-856) was another,
though unlike Lamarck he thought that the creation of new species derived
from the will of God. The species ﬁxism of Georges Cuvier (1769-832), on
the other hand, founded biological classiﬁcation on its explanatory value
rather than on facts supposed to give unequivocal answers as to species. In
doing so he drew a kind of pragmatic boundary around the concept
'species'. Cuvier divided individuals into hierarchies of types according to
their correspondence to certain exemplars, much as Linnaeus had done. But
for Cuvier the use of such exemplars was understood to be guided by heuristic
and practical considerations, and classiﬁcation according to similarity to an
exemplar was an explicit recognition of the fact that necessary and sufﬁcient
criteria for species were not to be found.
The method works by choosing one member of a group (a genus within a
family, or a species within a genus) as the type and then describing it very
carefully. Nontype members are described only by their variations from the
type. Both the method of exemplars and the choice of individual exemplary
types are justiﬁed by pragmatic considerations only ... .In 1828, Cuvier
explained his pragmatic choice of the genus of the perch as typical for its
family was merely because 'it is a ﬁsh that is easy to procure'.
(Amundson, Changing Role, 43)9
Running in tandem with debates about species ﬁxism and the ontological
and explanatory dimensions of classiﬁcation during this period was a
concern with the relative merits of structure and function in guiding classiﬁ-
cation. In the ﬁrst few decades of the nineteenth century the function of an
organ or other part of an organism was often taken to be observationally
known, while its structure required investigation (Amundson, Changing
Role, 57). Cuvier, for instance, took the evident functional roles of various
9At pages 62ff., Amundson (Changing Role) argues that the explanatory interpretation of
type-classiﬁcation, rather than the metaphysical interpretation, lies behind much of the
work done on natural taxonomies in the decades leading up to Darwin's work on evolution
by natural selection.
INFERENCE BY ANALOGY AND THE PROGRESS OF KNOWLEDGE
695

organic parts for granted, and he used this to defend species-ﬁxism: organisms
are so delicately coordinated to the conditions of their environment that to
change the function of some organic part (as must be done if the species is
to change) would be to kill off the species (Amundson, Changing Role, 44).
By the 1850s, however, this situation was reversed and appeals to functional
deﬁnitions were looked on as suspicious while talk of structure was regarded
as observationally unproblematic (Amundson, Changing Role, 57-8, 72-3).
Owen, for instance, rejects teleological or adaptationist methods of vertebrate
classiﬁcation in favour of structural homologies. His archetypes guide the
classiﬁcation of individuals according to structural similarities among them.
It is instructive to reﬂect on the fact that, within the span of a generation, func-
tional role would go from being observationally recorded to theoretically
inferred while structure would make the opposite journey.
VI. DARWIN'S HYPOTHESIS
I contend that the method of inquiry Darwin was engaged in while formulat-
ing his theory of natural selection can be understood as an extended oper-
ation of the reﬂecting power of judgement culminating in an inference that
is of a piece with what Hegel discusses as inference by analogy and Peirce
as abduction. The ﬁrst thing to note is that Darwin himself opens the
Origin by drawing an analogy between a source domain of artiﬁcial selection
and the target domain of natural selection. In the course of defending my
reading I will show that Darwin's theory in fact leads to a position where
natural selection is an analogical source for reasoning about other forms of
purpose, with the result that his theory offers us an alternative to Kant's con-
ception of natural purpose.
The reception of On the Origin of Species in Europe was mixed for years.
Darwin's method was often the target of attack. Of central concern was the
fact that so much of the argument of the book rested upon claims that either
lacked sufﬁcient empirical support, or which could not in principle be veriﬁed.
Cases of the former included the lack of an account of the mechanism of trans-
mission of traits across generations. And while biologists had known for gen-
erations that certain plant and animal traits were heritable, the idea that whole
species could arise via this sort of process seemed beyond the realm of plausi-
bility. An instance of the latter methodological shortcoming, as perceived by
Darwin's contemporaries, was his use of his and others' observations in
support of claims about the distant past which were in principle unveriﬁable.
This latter feature of Darwin's argument led some to charge that the very
idea was muddled. In a time when divergence from Baconian principles of
inquiry could be taken as a sign that a researcher was methodologically con-
fused, the accusation against Darwin was often put as a charge that he had
failed to apply the inductive method appropriately. The view of Adam Sedg-
wick (1785-873) is illustrative. Sedgwick had taught geology to Darwin and
696
PRESTON STOVALL

he would become an outspoken critic of Darwin's views on evolution. In a
letter written to Darwin on 24 November 1859 Sedgwick writes:
If I did not think you a good tempered and truth loving man I should not tell
you that ... I have read your book with more pain than pleasure. Parts of it I
admired greatly; parts I laughed at till my sides were almost sore; other
parts I read with absolute sorrow; because I think them utterly false and grie-
vously mischievous. You have deserted - after a start in that tram-road of all
solid physical truth - the true method of induction - and started up a machin-
ery as wild I think as Bishop Wilkin's locomotive that was to sail with us to
the moon. Many of your wide conclusions are based upon assumptions which
can neither be proved nor disproved. Why then express them in the language
and arrangements of philosophical induction?
(Clark and Hughes, Life and Letters, vol. 2, 356, emphasis in the original)
The dialectical thread of this paper permits us a response here on Darwin's
behalf. For we can agree with Sedgwick that, indeed, Darwin's hypothesis
was not founded on inductive principles. Instead we can characterize it as
an abductive inference, a form of non-deductive reasoning with its own
logical grammar. Darwin's hypothesis was not one of extending the relations
that govern our understanding of some given set of observations into the
future, projecting them so as to purport to understand new cases; it was
instead an inference to a conclusion that, were it to obtain, would best
explain a set of observations that otherwise remain, here and now, incompre-
hensible to us. There is evidence that Darwin himself thought of his project
in these terms. After listing a series of features of embryological develop-
ment that were at the time inexplicable, Darwin writes that he will use his
theory to explain them (Origin of Species, 592ff). The book was ﬁrst pub-
lished in 1859 and in later editions Darwin addressed criticisms like Sedg-
wick's by explicitly defending his argumentative method. The concluding
chapter of the work begins with the claim:
As this whole volume is one long argument, it may be convenient to the reader
to have the leading facts and inferences brieﬂy recapitulated.
and in the 1872 edition Darwin writes in that conclusion:
It can hardly be supposed that a false theory would explain, in so satisfactory a
manner as does the theory of natural selection, the several large classes of
facts above speciﬁed. It has recently been objected that this is an unsafe
method of arguing; but it is a method used in judging of the common
events of life, and has often been used by the greatest natural philosophers.
(Origin of Species, 637)10
10My thanks to John Norton for bringing this passage to my attention. These remarks are
treated in the context of considering Darwin's argument is a case of inference to the best
INFERENCE BY ANALOGY AND THE PROGRESS OF KNOWLEDGE
697

Darwin also took it as a virtue of his theory that he could explain certain fea-
tures about the practices that biologists were engaged in.11 This feature of
Darwin's work represents a second dimension along which his theory is
abductive, this time directed at explaining the practices of classiﬁcation
extant in the community of biologists rather than at the order and regularity
of the organic world itself. It comes to the fore in the discussion of classiﬁ-
cation in Chapter 13 of the Origin. Here Darwin is clear that he takes his
theory to be supported by the fact that it helps to explain what biologists
are already doing.
We use the element of descent in classing the individuals of both sexes and of
all ages, although having few characters in common, under one species; we
use descent in classing acknowledged varieties, however different they may
be from their parent; and I believe this element of descent is the hidden
bond of connexion which naturalists have sought under the term of the
Natural System. On this idea of the natural system being, in so far as it has
been perfected, genealogical in its arrangement, with the grades of differences
between the descendants from a common parent, expressed by the terms
genera, families, orders, &c., we can understand the rules which we are com-
pelled to follow in our classiﬁcation.
(Origin of Species, 578)
Recall that the reﬂecting power of judgement for Kant is operative when
the understanding lacks the relevant concepts needed to comprehend an indi-
vidual or set of individuals with which one is confronted in observation. In
such a case our rational faculties turn to reﬂection on and comparison of
those individuals with one another given what limited resources we have
to understand them, all in the interest of framing some new conceptual
array with which, going forward, we can more adequately comprehend
them. Abductive inference is a paradigm case of the concluding movement
of an exercise of the reﬂective power of judgement. For abduction is operat-
ive when some state or relation is hypothesized on account of its capacity to
explain, were it true, some fact (or set of facts) that otherwise lacks an expla-
natory basis. Darwin's hypothesis, built on generations of comparative study
of organisms, rests on just such a collection and comparison of individual
bits of observation as is operative in Kantian reﬂection, and that hypothesis
itself is an inference to the best explanation. In drawing this inference
Darwin was able to reorganize our conception of the purposive character
of organic activity by reﬂecting on just what sorts of conditions would
explanation at the close of the penultimate chapter of Lipton's, Inference to the Best Expla-
nation, 206, and in Chapter 2 of Velasquez, Philosophy.
11It is one of the central theses of Amundson's The Changing Role of the Embryo that the
species ﬁxism underwriting various projects in natural taxonomy in the eighteenth and nine-
teenth centuries, rather than being in tension Darwin's view, instead helped to bolster his case
(see 132-4).
698
PRESTON STOVALL

have to obtain if the generation of species was to be naturalistically intelli-
gible. Central to this reorganization is Darwin's shift from a prospective
understanding of organic purpose as directedness towards a given
outcome, to a retrospective understanding of the natural conditions of gen-
eration and growth in organic things. By hypothesizing that variations would
naturally arise across generations, and that environmental factors (including
inter- and intraspecies competition) would select for certain varieties over
others, Darwin made the origin of species - and the great range of
species-preserving activities that organisms evince - naturalistically intelli-
gible. Now the purposive traits characteristic of organic generation and
growth could be understood without having to model them on the
forward-looking and intentional purposes of agency.
Against the backdrop of what Darwinian thinking has done for our under-
standing of the origin and character of organic activity, let us once again con-
sider Kant's commitments in this vicinity. For Kant was familiar with debates
concerning natural taxonomies in his day, and he staked out various positions
in that ﬁeld. Cast against the view that Darwin helped make available it is clear
that Kant was simply on the wrong side of the debate here. In the 'Method-
ology of the Teleological Power of Judgment' Kant writes:
It is commendable to go through the great creation of organized natures by
means of a comparative anatomy in order to see whether there is not to be
found therein something similar to a system, one, indeed, regarding the prin-
ciple of their generation ... This analogy of forms, insofar as in spite of all the
differences it seems to have been generated in accordance with a common pro-
totype (Urbild), strengthens the suspicion of a real kinship among them in
their generation from a common proto-mother (Urmutter) ...
Now here the archaeologist of nature is free to let that great family of crea-
tures (for thus must one represent it if there is to be a basis for the thoroughly
coherent kinship that has been mentioned) originate from the remaining traces
of its oldest revolutions in accordance with any mechanism for it that is known
to or conjectured by him. He can have the maternal womb of the earth, which
has just emerged from a condition of chaos (just like a great animal), initially
bear creatures of less purposive form, which in turn bear others that are formed
more suitably for their place of origin and their relationships to one another ...
And yet ultimately he must attribute to this universal mother an organization
purposively aimed at all these creatures, for otherwise the possibility of the
purposive form of the products of the animal and vegetable kingdoms
cannot be conceived at all.
(Critique of the Power of Judgment, 5:418-20, emphasis in the original)
Pace Kant, Darwin showed us that we do not need to suppose that later
species were purposively aimed at by a common proto-mother (earlier
members of a genealogy). Seen by the light of Darwin's retrospective
account of the purposive character of organic activity, the set of commit-
ments Kant has taken on in this prospective understanding of the purposes
INFERENCE BY ANALOGY AND THE PROGRESS OF KNOWLEDGE
699

of organisms looks confused. It was precisely because Darwin could con-
ceive of the 'possibility of the purposive form of the products of the
animal and vegetable kingdoms' otherwise than through prospective inten-
tionality that Kant's view here is shown to be false.
As evidence of the genuinely progressive character of Darwin's con-
ception of organic teleology as against Kant's we can turn to the asymmetric
analogical relations that underpin their respective views. For Kant the
organic world is interpreted via an analogical source of intentional agency.
The only model for understanding purposes that Kant was equipped for
was one where the representation of an end-state was guided by a mind in
causally organizing the object's activities towards that end. I put this point
by saying that purpose in Kant is a prospective sort of explanation; he under-
stands organic purposes on the model of an artiﬁcer who looks ahead to what
will come and causes things to match her design. Darwin showed, by con-
trast, that we need not posit any sort of future-directed representation in
organic activity, even by analogy, and that talk of purpose is intelligible
instead because of a retrospective perspective we adopt concerning the
ancestry of the organism and the role that its traits have played in its
species' survival. Whereas Kant's notion of purpose is centred on prospec-
tive assessments of intentional results, Darwin showed us how to understand
the non-intentional purposive character of organic things by reorganizing our
comprehension of how, retrospectively, there came to be such things as
these. And this reorganization affords the prospect of restructuring our com-
prehension of mind's place in nature. For once we had this independent grip
on the processes governing organic activity we could use our understanding
of these processes as an analogical base on which to make sense of other
domains. With selection processes understood as a natural phenomenon,
any system exhibiting the right structure has the potential to undergo devel-
opment.12 And American intellectuals in the second half of the nineteenth
century put Darwin's conceptual toolkit to use in rethinking the place of
mind in nature; their doing so is evidence that Darwin's hypothesis resulted
in an advance in our understanding of the world, and so is evidence for the
reconstruction above of Kant, Hegel, and Peirce as one that captures some of
the processes of conceptual development. From John Dewey's 'The Inﬂu-
ence of Darwin on Philosophy:'
The inﬂuence of Darwin upon philosophy resides in his having conquered the
phenomena of life for the principle of transition, and thereby freed the new
logic for application to mind and morals ...
12Lewontin's 'The Units of Selection', ﬁrst published in 1970, is often credited as the origin
point for the contemporary application of selection-thinking to domains outside the organic.
But the use of natural selection processes as an analogical base for understanding, for
example, human education and socio-historical change was characteristic of American philos-
ophy from the 1860s well into the twentieth century.
700
PRESTON STOVALL

VII. AMERICAN PRAGMATISM AS EVIDENCE THAT DARWIN'S
HYPOTHESIS REORIENTED KANT'S ANALOGICAL
UNDERSTANDING OF ORGANIC AND MINDED PURPOSES
The programme to use Darwinian principles of selection as an analogical
source from which to reason about the analogical targets of mind and
society was taken up with vigour by American philosophers in the second
half of the nineteenth century. This event was primed by the projects in
faculty psychology, political philosophy, and the moral sentiments that
were the basis of senior capstone courses in American university education
in the middle of the nineteenth century. These courses were driven by a kind
of Scottish enlightenment cum German romantic cum American Protestant
sentiment that was prevalent in the USA during that time. With the publi-
cation of On the Origin of Species these projects were refounded on selection
principles drawn from Darwin's theory.13 Whereas debates concerning pre-
existing theories kept Darwin's views from widespread acceptance in Europe
for some time, in the USA the theory of natural selection was embraced
almost immediately. Many of the philosophical resources developed by
the classical American pragmatists were inﬂuenced by the Darwinian revo-
lution in biology (cf. Peirce, 'Some Consequences of Four Incapacities', for
an early statement, and for a discussion of the impact of evolutionary think-
ing on American philosophy see Fisch 1947). Chauncey Wright (1830-75),
the 'Cambridge Socrates' and a founding member of the Metaphysical Club,
was quickly enamoured of Darwin's view, and began to put it to work in
revising his own thinking (Schneider, History of American Philosophy,
304ff; Menand, Metaphysical Club, 209ff). In correspondence Darwin
asked Wright to extend Darwin's principles to account for the evolution of
self-consciousness. Wright thought that this evolution proceeded on the
basis of simpler forms of activity being put to new uses, and he argued
that the capacity for reﬂection would have played an important role in this
proces (Schneider, History of American Philosophy, 304).
Darwin's ideas were just as quickly applied to social and historical
domains. A physiologist from New York named John William Draper
(1811-82) wrote a paper entitled 'On the Intellectual Development of
Europe Considered with Reference to the Views of Mr. Darwin and
Others That the Progression of Organisms is Determined by Law' that was
a topic of a famous debate at Oxford in 1860.14 Edward Drinker Cope
(1840-97), biologist and professor at the University of Pennsylvania,
13Though it continued into the twentieth century under the guise of evolutionary naturalism
and critical realism, this is a period of American education that has fallen into neglect. Chap-
ters 30-3 of Schneider, History of American Philosophy, chapters 6, 8, and 9 of Kuklick
(History of Philosophy in America), and chapters 6 through 9 of Menand (Metaphysical
Club) provide some introduction to this period (Schneider is particularly helpful).
14See the discussion in Fisch, 'Evolution in American Philosophy', 357-8.
INFERENCE BY ANALOGY AND THE PROGRESS OF KNOWLEDGE
701

applied Darwin's principles to the history of moral development, urging that
in doing so we could do away with a need for a dualistic interpretation of
mind (Schneider, History of American Philosophy, 318). This 'genetic
theory of intelligence' would inﬂuence American philosophers for gener-
ations. John Fiske (1842-901), Lester F. Ward (1841-913), and James
Mark Baldwin (1861-934) thought that the application of Darwinian prin-
ciples to issues in psychology and the philosophy of mind meant that
social life and collective action indicated a 'distinct stage in the evolutionary
process' (Schneider, History of American Philosophy, 343). At the begin-
ning of the twentieth century, this programme was extended to the social
sciences by ﬁgures at Chicago, including John Dewey, James H. Tufts,
George Herbert Mead, and Thorstein Veblen. Mead, for instance, thought
that scientiﬁc inquiry should be understood in terms of evolutionary prin-
ciples. Throughout all of this work there is a commitment to the use of Dar-
winian principles of biology as a model for explaining other domains.
To this task the new biology brought excellent instruments of analysis: 'adap-
tation to the environment', 'spontaneous variation', 'struggle for existence',
'survival value', these were concepts, at once both physical and teleological,
which could readily be applied to all phases of culture and to the criticism of
all institutions.
(Schneider, History of American Philosophy, 337)
The employment of Darwinian resources as analogical sources for
explaining other domains by American philosophers is a case of conceptual
progress of the sort predicted by the discussion of abduction and inference by
analogy as a working out of the reﬂective power of judgement canvassed at
the start of this paper. This fact about the shift in analogical relations under-
lying organic explanation thus supports my contention that Darwin's Origin
was an instance of the form of reasoning discussed in Sections II and III. And
the fact that Darwin's Origin can be understood in terms of that rational
reconstruction of Kant, Hegel, and Peirce thereby supports that reconstruc-
tion as one that has merit as a partial account of some of the processes of con-
ceptual development. For Darwin's work stands as a case where our rational
faculties were forced into reﬂection on account of a paucity of concepts with
which to understand something, and which as a result of that reﬂection
arrived at a new set of concepts to apply in judgement and inference. To
put the point in terms of Kant's notion of judgement, in a pre-Darwinian
mode our understanding of organic purpose is insufﬁcient for the exercise
of the determining power of judgement within that domain, and instead
we must exercise reﬂection and frame an understanding of the organic
world by analogy with intentional agency. But the explanatory tools that
were developed in the wake of Darwin's Origin allow us to understand
organic purposes without founding that understanding on an analogy with
agency. Instead, these new explanations enable us to give an account of
702
PRESTON STOVALL

the origin of purposive processes on the basis of natural forces undirected by
intentional agency, and on this basis we can justify and explicate the judge-
ments of purpose we make of nature. By the light of the foregoing discus-
sion, we are now in a position to regard the conceptual revolution in
nineteenth-century biology as a case where our capacity for making judge-
ments of purpose about the natural world moved from a reﬂecting to a deter-
mining employment. No longer were we without a conceptual understanding
of natural purposes and forced by reﬂection onto an analogy with agency.
Instead, we were able to frame a set of explanatory resources with which
to begin to apply purposive concepts to nature in a determining mode of jud-
gement. In closing out this paper I want to use this conclusion to address the
problem of the apparent incompatibility of mechanistic and purposive expla-
nation that opened this paper.
VIII. CONCLUDING REMARKS ON PURPOSIVE AND
MECHANISTIC EXPLANATION
Darwin shows us how we can, for principled reasons and with a genuine
alternative to replace it, reject Kant's conception of natural purpose as exclu-
sively modelled by intentional causal explanation, and with it reject both his
assessment of the limits of our cognition and his dim outlook on the prospect
for reconciling purposive and mechanical explanation. For Kant's problem
was his equation of end-directedness with intentional causality, and that
problem is itself a result of the limited conceptual resources with which
Kant could reason about organic things. Nevertheless, the separation of
intentional causality from end-directedness needed to overcome Kant's
problem was a separation that only became intelligible once we had the
resources sufﬁcient to explain how there came to be complex organized crea-
tures without a mindedness that organized them. And it should be obvious
that this does not by itself imply that Darwin (or anyone else) was looking
for a set of categories to overcome this very problem - by contrast, it is
only after we have the requisite explanation in hand that the problem
shows up as a problem at all. To assume otherwise would be one more
instance of the confused thought that end-directedness, simply as such,
entails intentionality. And it is a cornerstone of Darwinian explanation
that we can, when the conditions are right, have purpose without intention.
Kant thought that what separates mind from mechanistic nature is the fact
that while mental activity no less than mechanistic activity is law-governed,
only the former sort of activity is governed by the representation of a law (or
rule). The suggestion that what is characteristic of mental activity is the role
of representation in mediating stimulus and response makes for a promising
basis on which to distinguish mind from non-minded nature. But because
Kant could conceive of organic purpose only by analogy with intentional
causality, where causal relations are determined by the representation of a
INFERENCE BY ANALOGY AND THE PROGRESS OF KNOWLEDGE
703

future state as guiding current activity, he is forced to conclude that purpo-
sive explanation is an operation of the merely reﬂecting, and not the deter-
mining, power of judgement. Because the world is wholly mechanistic a
purposive explanation of an organic thing does not make a claim about
how things are. Those explanations are instead an 'as if' stance that rep-
resents how things seem to be for creatures with such limited cognitive
capacities as ours. And now that which allowed Kant to distinguish mind
from nature - the role of representation - makes it impossible to relate
them to one another, save by appeal to a supersensible reality cut off from
human cognition.
The view Darwin leaves us with is one that gives us reason to reject certain
elements of the Kantian architectonic. Nevertheless, I think the way forward
here is suggested by Kant. If the shift in focus from prospective represen-
tational causality to retrospective natural selection processes strikes to the
core of the revolutionary character of Darwin's hypothesis then it would
seem that judgements of natural teleology should not be understood as attri-
butions of representation-guiding activity. Instead, purposive language
about the organic world functions as a device for situating a given judgement
about an individual organism within a web of subjunctive supposition, impli-
cation, and incompatibility, a structured space of possibility governing how
that organism would and would not behave were various events to occur. But
that is just to say, with a nod to Kant, that natural teleology is in the ﬁrst
instance a mode of the understanding rather than a distinct causal power
of things. On this view teleological explanations mark off a certain structure
in the space of reasoning that situates our understanding of different kinds of
object, a structure along which we interpret certain objects as things whose
ancestries are essential to their identities and whose activities will tend
towards the maintenance of the individual and the propagation of the kind,
thereby reasoning about those objects in accordance with these tendencies.
And modality for Kant is unlike the other categories in that it does not
add content to judgements:
The modality of judgments is a quite special function of them, which is dis-
tinctive in that it contributes nothing to the content of the judgment (for
besides quantity, quality, and relation there is nothing more that constitutes
the content of a judgment), but rather concerns only the value of the copula
in relation to thinking in general.
(Critique of Pure Reason, A74/B99-100)
Now if modality does not add content to a judgement but rather situates that
judgement within a space of reasoning then a fortiori a judgement of organic
purpose does not, simply of itself, attribute representational causality,
activity that is guided as if by a mind representing future states. Once we
have a means for explaining the origins of organic purposes without a
model of intentional agency there is no longer any reason to think that
704
PRESTON STOVALL

talk of organic purpose fetters us with unwanted ontology or representational
commitments incompatible with mechanistic explanation. The organic
object is a thing whose identity is maintained over the course of its existence,
and whose kind is perpetuated, by the operations of its parts as they integrate
the causal forces that impact the object in its environment as means towards
its ends. In its chemical constitution the organic thing is mechanical through-
and-through, and because constitution is not identity the organic whole has a
teleological modal proﬁle its parts (considered chemically) do not. Talk of
the purposive character of these processes is not an ascription of intention-
ality to them; it is instead a condition for a certain sort of understanding,
one concerning the complexities with which the individual would and
would not respond to various stimuli given the kind of thing it is. And this
is just to say that natural teleology is a mode of reasoning, not an attribution
of representational states. In characterizing something as naturally purposive
I commit myself to a mode under which to subjunctively integrate and under-
stand its activity, and any commitments I incur concerning the causal aetiol-
ogy of that activity are commitments detailing the origin of its purposive
traits via natural selection rather than commitments concerning represen-
tations of future states as causally responsible for its behaviour. Purposive
explanation and the attribution of mechanical causation are entirely consist-
ent from within a Darwinian frame reconstructed in this fashion. We are now
free to keep intentional purpose (activity in accordance with the represen-
tation of a law or rule), as a causal explanation at the level it belongs - in
the mindedness characteristic of agency.15 In the nonagentive organic
cases the use of teleological operators marks a mode of relating our represen-
tations to one another in a structured space of subjunctive implication; it does
not attribute representational states to the objects so understood. Kant did not
have the resources to understand teleology in this way, and so he could not so
much as think of a purposive explanation that was not reliant on an analogy
with intentional agency.16 But Darwin gave us the means to see that Kant is
aufgehoben here - with Darwin's hypothesis we became capable of deter-
mining rather than reﬂecting exercises of the power of judgement when
reasoning about organic purpose.17
15There is also a distinction to be made between objects that represent future states as guides
for action, and those which represent future states as rules towards which they conform them-
selves - for example, between mere animal behaviour and the agency of persons.
16From Critique of the Power of Judgment 5:397, emphasis added:
[H]ow could I count things that are deﬁnitely supposed to be products of divine art
among the products of nature, whose incapacity for producing such things in accord-
ance with its laws is precisely that which has made necessary the appeal to a cause that
is distinct from it?
17That the organic individual's activities are directed at preserving both the individual and the
species, while nevertheless it is always the individual (never the species) that is causally
responsible for the meeting of these ends, suggests that nominalism as a debate in metaphysics
INFERENCE BY ANALOGY AND THE PROGRESS OF KNOWLEDGE
705

I began this paper by pointing out that purposive and mechanistic expla-
nations appear to be incompatible in understanding organic generation and
growth. In the subsequent discussion I have used a Hegelian/Peircean
response to Kant, together with a reading of Darwin's work on natural selec-
tion, as a way of thinking through these conceptual tensions. I suspect that
the shortcomings in Kant's understanding of teleology in our judgement
about organic things - invoking as it does so much of the Kantian architec-
tonic - is a thread that, if pulled, would lead to the unravelling of much of
that architectonic (it is certainly true that the post-Kantian German idealists
took Kant's third Critique to be the point at which Kant's system comes
closest to breaking free of its transcendental conﬁnes). Nevertheless, this
is a thread that was spun on Kant's loom; in particular, it was spun from
his treatment of the reﬂecting power of judgement. In this criticism of the
Kantian picture, followed by the effort to reframe an alternative, I have
tried to show that we gain some understanding of how our conceptual com-
mitments can change over time as we struggle to come to grips with them.
Seen by this light, the foregoing discussion can be viewed as a propaedeutic
for a theory of conceptual determination via determinate negation18 - if the
progress of knowledge is to proceed rationally we are obliged to think
through the incompatibilities we ﬁnd ourselves with rather than give in to
an artiﬁcial ersatz as a resolution. I think there is some go in the thought
that philosophical inquiry itself can, without too much disservice, be con-
strued as the practice of engaging in this sort of categorial criticism and
rational reconstruction.
Submitted 5 March 2015; revised 12 April; accepted 22 April
University of Pittsburgh
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Amundson, Ron. The Changing Role of the Embryo in Evolutionary
Thought. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2005.
Bartha, Paul. By Parallel Reasoning: The Construction and Evaluation of
Analogical Arguments. New York: Oxford University Press, 2010.
Burstein, Mark H. 'Combining Analogies in Mental Models'. In Analogical
Reasoning: Perspectives of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Cognitive Science,
and Philosophy, edited by D. H. Helman, 179-203. Boston: Kluwer
Academic, 1988.
and the philosophy of language ought to be rethought in light of what we now know about the
nature of organic things.
18This idea, like so much else here, owes its inception to Robert Brandom's semantic reading
of Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit.
706
PRESTON STOVALL

Clark, John Willis, and Thomas McKenny Hughes, eds. The Life and Letters
of the Reverend Adam Sedgwick. 2 vols. New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1890.
Darwin, Charles. The Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection. 6th
ed. New York: Modern Library, 1993, 1872.
Dewey, John. 'The Inﬂuence of Darwinism on Philosophy'. In The
Philosophy of John Dewey: Two Volumes in One, edited by John J.
McDermott, 31-41. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981.
Fisch, Max. 'Evolution in American Philosophy'. The Philosophical Review
56, no. 4 (1947): 357-73. doi:10.2307/2181315.
Gentner, Dedre, and Julie Colhoun. 'Analogical Processes in Human
Thinking and Learning'. In On Thinking: Vol. 2. Towards a Theory of
Thinking, series editors A. von Müller and E. Pöppel, volume editors
B. Glatzeder, V. Goel, and A. von Müller, 35-48. New York:
Springer Science. 2010.
Gentner, Dedre, Keith J. Holyoak, and Boicho N. Kokinov, eds. The
Analogical Mind: Perspectives from Cognitive Science. Cambridge:
MIT Press, 2001.
Gentner, Dedre and L. Smith. 'Analogical Reasoning'. In Encyclopedia of
Human Behavior. 2nd ed. edited by V. S. Ramachandran, 130-6.
Oxford: Elsevier, 2012.
Hegel, G. W. F. Outlines of Hegel's Logic. In Hegel Selections, translated by
H. S. Harris, edited by Jacob Loewenberg, 98-128. New York: Charles
Scribner's Sons, 1957.
Hegel, G. W. F. Gesammlte Werke. Hamburg: Felix Meiner Vorlag, 1968.
Hegel, G. W. F. The Jena System, 1804-5: Logic and Metaphysic.
Translated and edited by John W. Burbidge and George di Giovanni,
introduction and explanatory notes by H. S. Harris. Montreal: McGill-
Queen's University Press, 1986.
Hegel, G. W. F. The Encyclopedia Logic. Translated by T. F. Geraets, W. A.
Suchting, and H. S. Harris. Indianapolis: Hackett, 1991.
Hegel, G. W. F. The Science of Logic. Translated by George di Giovanni.
New York: Cambridge University Press, 2010.
Helman, David H., ed. Analogical Reasoning: Perspectives of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, Cognitive Science, and Philosophy. Boston: Kluwer
Academic, 1988.
Hesse, Mary. 'Operational Deﬁnition and Analogy in Physical Theories'.
The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 2, no. 8 (1952):
281-94. doi:10.1093/bjps/II.8.281.
Hesse, Mary. 'Analogy and Conﬁrmation Theory'. Philosophy of Science
31, no. 4 (1964): 319-27. doi:10.1086/288017.
Hesse, Mary. Models and Analogies in Science. Notre Dame: University of
Notre Dame Press, 1966.
Hesse, Mary. The Structure of Inference. Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1974.
Kant, Immanuel. Gesammelte Schriften. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter & Co., 1900.
Kant, Immanuel. 'The False Subtlety of the Four Syllogistic Figures'. In
The Cambridge Edition of the Works of Immanuel Kant: Theoretical
INFERENCE BY ANALOGY AND THE PROGRESS OF KNOWLEDGE
707

Philosophy
1755-1770,
edited
by
David
Walford,
New
York:
Cambridge University Press, 1992.
Kant, Immanuel. Lectures on Logic. Translated and edited by J. Michael
Young. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1992.
Kant, Immanuel. Critique of Pure Reason. Translated and edited by Paul Guyer
and Allen W. Wood, New York: Cambridge University Press, 1998.
Kant, Immanuel. Critique of the Power of Judgment. Translated by Paul
Guyer and Eric Matthews, edited by Paul Guyer. New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Kuklick, Bruce. A History of Philosophy in America. New York: Oxford
University Press, 2001.
Larson, James L. Reason and Experience: The Representation of Natural
Order in the Work of Carl von Linné. Los Angeles: University of
California Press, 1971.
Lewontin, R. C. 'The Units of Selection'. Annual Reviews of Ecology and
Systematics 1 (1970): 1-18.
Lipton, Peter. Inference to the Best Explanation. 2nd ed. New York:
Routledge, 2004.
Menand, Louis. The Metaphysical Club: A Story of Ideas in America.
New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 2001.
Müller-Wille, Staffan. 'History Redoubled: The Synthesis of Facts in
Linnaean Natural History'. In Philosophies of Technology: Francis
Bacon and His Contemporaries, edited by Claus Zittel, Gisela Engel,
Romano Nanni, and Nicole C. Karafyllis, Leiden: Koninklijke Brill
NV, 2008.
Peirce, Charles Sanders. 'Deduction, Induction, and Hypothesis'. In The
Essential Peirce: Selected Philosophical Writings, Vol. 1 (1867-
1893), edited by Nathan Houser and Christian Kloesel, 186-99.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1868, 1992.
Peirce, Charles Sanders. 'The Three Normative Sciences'. In The Essential
Peirce: Selected Philosophical Writings, Volume 2 (1893-1913), edited
by
the
Peirce
Edition
Project,
196-207.
Bloomington:
Indiana
University Press, 1901, 1998.
Peirce, Charles Sanders. 'Some Consequences of Four Incapacities'. In The
Essential Peirce: Selected Philosophical Writings, Vol. 1 (1867-1893),
edited by Nathan Houser and Christian Kloesel, 28-55. Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 1868, 1992.
Peirce, Charles Sanders. 'On the Logic of Drawing History from Ancient
Documents,
Especially
Testimonies'.
In
The
Essential
Peirce:
Selected Philosophical Writings, Volume 2 (1893-1913), edited by the
Peirce Edition Project, 75-114. Bloomington: Indiana University
Press, 1901, 1998.
Redding, Paul. 'Hegel and Peircean Abduction'. European Journal of
Philosophy 11, no. 3 (2003): 295-313.
Schneider, Herbert W. A History of American Philosophy. 2nd ed.
New York: Columbia University Press, 1963.
Stovall, Preston. 'Abductive Inference, Autonomy, and the Faith of
Abraham'. In Interpreting Abraham: Journeys to Moriah, edited by
708
PRESTON STOVALL

Bradley Beach and Matthew Powell. Minneanapolis: Fortress Press,
2014.
Thagard, Paul. 'Dimensions of Analogy'. In Analogical Reasoning:
Perspectives
of
Artiﬁcial
Intelligence,
Cognitive
Science,
and
Philosophy, 105-24. Boston: Kluwer Academic, 1988.
Velasquez, Manuel. Philosophy: A Text with Readings. 12th ed. Boston:
Wadsworth/Cengage Learning, 2013.
INFERENCE BY ANALOGY AND THE PROGRESS OF KNOWLEDGE
709

