Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology
ISSN: 0007-1773 (Print) 2332-0486 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rbsp20
Mimetic Phantasia in Action: Marc Richir's
Phenomenology of Intersubjectivity
Mauro Senatore
To cite this article: Mauro Senatore (2024) Mimetic Phantasia in Action: Marc Richir's
Phenomenology of Intersubjectivity, Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology, 55:2,
149-166, DOI: 10.1080/00071773.2024.2312862
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00071773.2024.2312862
Published online: 08 Feb 2024.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 285
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rbsp20

Mimetic Phantasia in Action: Marc Richir's Phenomenology of
Intersubjectivity
Mauro Senatore
Department of Philosophy, Universidad Adolfo Ibáñez, Santiago, Chile
ABSTRACT
In this article, I aim to cast light on the genetic analyses of the
apperception of the other that the phenomenologist Marc Richir
develops in his late masterwork Phénoménologie en esquisses
(2000). My reading hypothesis is that these analyses consist in the
original
contribution
that
Richir
makes
to
the
standard
phenomenological account of empathy from within his overall
project of a non-standard revision/refoundation of the Husserlian
genetic phenomenology. To test this hypothesis, I trace Richir's
reinterpretation
of
two
texts
from
Husserl's
so-called
phenomenology of intersubjectivity (Hua XIII, 10 and 13), in which
Husserl interweaves together the questions of the I's implication in
phantasy and of the apprehension of the other's living body by
presentiﬁcation. As my examination develops, I show that Richir
ﬁnds in these texts the phenomenological attestation of the
nomadic and presubjective phantasia that, on his reading, Husserl
had discovered in his earlier 1904-05 lectures on phantasy.
ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 9 October 2022
Accepted 27 January 2024
KEYWORDS
Empathy; Husserl; Körper;
Leib; phantasia; Richir
For [par] its Leib, the human Leibkörper is immediately "intersubjective."1
Introduction
Arguably, there is a standard phenomenological account of empathy (Einfühlung),
understood as the most basic form of social cognition. According to this standard
account, empathy entails a sort of given togetherness or interconnectedness. We perceive
the stranger human body as "expressive," that is, as impregnated with psychological
meaning from the outset, in an immediate and non-inferential way.2 By tracing a
lineage that goes from Husserl to Merleau-Ponty, Matthew Ratcliﬀe remarks that phe-
nomenology is informed by "a conception of intersubjectivity as a kind of presupposed
[practical, bodily, aﬀective] togetherness, rather than the traversing of a gulf between
© 2024 The British Society for Phenomenology
CONTACT Mauro Senatore
mauro.senatore@uai.cl; mauro.senatore0@gmail.com
Av. Diag. Las Torres 2640,
7941169 Santiago, Peñalolén, Chile
1 Richir, Phénomenologie en esquisses : Nouvelles fondations, 276 (hereafter referred to as PE). In this article, all trans-
lations from PE are mine.
2 As Scheler puts it, by unfolding the parti pris of the standard phenomenological account of empathy: "Our primary
knowledge of Nature is itself a knowledge of the expressive aspect of living organisms; mental phenomena therefore
(which are invariably presented only within a structural context), are always given, in the ﬁrst instance, in unities of
expression" (The Nature of Sympathy, 218). On this text, see Zahavi 122-23.
THE JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
2024, VOL. 55, NO. 2, 149-166
https://doi.org/10.1080/00071773.2024.2312862

people" (or between "two distinct and hidden mental lives").3 Along the same line, Dan
Zahavi explains that, if there is a distinctive phenomenology of empathy, the latter should
consist not so much in abstractly ascribing a mental state to others as in being directly
attuned with their experiential life.4
The following account of empathy by Husserl can be read as exemplary of the phe-
nomenological idea of togetherness and expressivity that I have sketched above. Accord-
ing to Dermot Moran, this account "may be said to represent Husserl's classical
statement of the nature of empathy."5 Husserl starts by putting forward the deﬁnition
of empathy as the act of presentifying something present such as the psychic life of
the other: "I mean empathy as the consciousness through which an alien psychic life
can be given to an ego in its life of consciousness."6 As he unpacks his deﬁnition,
Husserl explains that the presentifying act consists in the apperception of the alien
lived-corporeality, perceived as a physical thing-like body, as a lived body, an appercep-
tion which hinges on the similarity of this body to my own lived body. Signiﬁcantly, the
presentiﬁcation of the consciousness that belongs to the lived body, which is at stake in
this apperception, is diﬀerent from the bringing into intuition of the visible aspects of the
thing-like body that is required in the perceptual apperception.7 As Moran points out,
this apperception hinges on a given interconnectedness, which Husserl designates as
similarity, and thus cannot be merged with an inferential operation. For this reason,
Moran goes on, we immediately perceive the living person "as Leib," that is, "as a
physico-psychic complex of body and soul."8
In what follows, I will measure against this standard phenomenology of empathy the
genetic analyses of the apperception of the other that Mar Richir, one of the most signiﬁ-
cant ﬁgures in more recent so-called French phenomenology, develops in his late master-
work Phénoménologie en esquisses: Nouvelles fondations (2000).9 In this work, Richir
oﬀers a revised version of Husserl's genetic phenomenology, understood as the retrospec-
tive inquiry into the originary instituting genesis (Ur-Stiftung) of the varying acts through
which consciousness puts the experience of the world into sense (apperceptions) and of
the related habits and sedimented intentional sense.10 As the title of the work suggests,
Richir's non-standard genetic analyses start from new foundations, namely, the poorly
explored phenomenological ﬁeld of phantasia and the related temporalization in pres-
ence (without an assignable present). For Richir, this ﬁeld is more archaic than any sym-
bolical institution (Stiftung), including that of my real I and living body (Leibkörper), and,
as we will see, the most archaic one that is attested within the limits of the standard
3 Ratcliﬀe 334-35.
4 Zahavi 150.
5 Moran 297.
6 Hua XI, 372.
7 Ibid., 372-73. For a resonating account of empathy, see Edith Stein's demarcation of analogizing and association by
similarity from analogical inference, in Stein, On the Problem of Empathy, 59 and Moran 309-10. For Husserl's concept
of apperception, see Zahavi 128-29.
8 Ibid., 297.
9 Identiﬁed as one of the three key-ﬁgures of Neue Phänomenologie in France, with Michel Henry and Jean-Luc Marion
(see Gondek and Tengelyi, Neue Phänomenologie in Frankreich), as Alexander Schnell argues, perhaps more justly,
Richir stands as a singular ﬁgure in the phenomenological tradition tout court (Le sens se faisant). For an introduction
to Richir's work, see Richir and Carlson, L'écart et le rien.
10 On this understanding of standard genetic phenomenology, see PE 40 and Niel, "Husserl's Concept of Ur-Stiftung: From
Passivity to History." On Richir's overall project of revision/refoundation, see Forestier, La phénoménologie génétique de
Marc Richir.
150
M. SENATORE

Husserlian phenomenology. These foundations are brought to light by Richir through an
original interpretation of Husserl's 1904-05 lectures on phantasy (Phantasie; Hua
XXXIII, text n.1) and of his so-called phenomenology of intersubjectivity (Hua XIII,
texts n.10 and n.13). My reading hypothesis is that Richir's analyses of the apperception
of the other consist in the original contribution to the standard account of empathy at
work in Husserl's phenomenology of intersubjectivity, that Richir makes within the
broader project of his non-standard genetic phenomenology. As I will show later, these
analyses trace the mimetic play of phantasia that makes the apperception of the other
possible within the symbolical institution of the real I and Leibkörper. In doing so, they
resituate in this archaic play the basic attunement and expressivity that the standard phe-
nomenology of empathy postulates, with all the implications that I will explore below.
Richir's analyses unfold as a two-stage selective close-reading of Hua XIII texts n.10
and n.13.11 First, in Section I of PE (§§8-9), Richir traces across text n.10 the argumen-
tative steps that Husserl takes to interweave together the question of the implication of
my I (Ich) and living body (Leib) in phantasy and that of the representability of the
other's I and living body. As Richir shows in the previous sessions of Section I, one
can ﬁnd in Husserl's 1904-05 lectures a "revolutionary" doctrine of phantasy as a
more archaic vitality of consciousness (in Richir's lexicon, phantasia) that puts the struc-
ture of perceptual apperception, characterized by the objective intentionality and the
temporalization in the present, out of service.12 This vitality is missed by the standard
phenomenological epoché, which, by deﬁnition, hinges on the acritical extension of
that structure to the whole life of consciousness. In fact, phantasia reveals a kind of
hyperbolical epoché which suspends all Stiftungen and relocates the perceptual appercep-
tion in its corresponding architectonic site, as a speciﬁc symbolical institution bearing the
trace of the more archaic activity of its foundations.13 According to Richir, Husserl does
not draw out the consequences of this doctrine; on the contrary, in his subsequent work
on phantasy, he struggles to negotiate them with the developments of his standard phe-
nomenology. It is in his phenomenology of intersubjectivity, Richir argues, that Husserl
overcomes the limits posed by phantasia to standard phenomenological analysis and, by
implicitly enacting the aforementioned hyperbolical epoché, ﬁnds the phenomenological
(this time, in a non-standard sense) attestation of the activity of phantasia in the appre-
hension of the stranger body (Körper) as the other's living body (Leib).14 Richir focuses
on this ﬁnding of Husserl's phenomenology of intersubjectivity as it subscribes to a revi-
sion and refoundation of standard genetic phenomenology into a non-standard phanta-
sia-based one. Second, in Section II (chapter 3, §§3-4), Richir returns to Husserl's
phenomenology of intersubjectivity (this time also examining text n.13) within the
established framework of his non-standard genetic analyses.15 Here, Richir draws on
11 This reading centres on Husserl, Zur Phänomenologie der Intersubjektivität, 288-312 (n.10); 333-41 (n.13). For an intro-
duction to these texts, see Kern, "Husserl's Phenomenology of Intersubjectivity." For an overview of Husserl's treatment
of intersubjectivity throughout his work, see Walsh, "Husserl on Other Minds."
12 PE 61-112. On Richir's non-standard interpretation of Husserl's lectures on Phantasie, see Schnell, Temps et phénomène,
35-70, and Le sens se faisant : Marc Richir et la refondation de la phénoménologie transcendantale, 34-48, and Senatore,
"Where Do Centaurs Come From?".
13 PE 112-34.
14 PE 134-50. For an overview of Richir's treatment of intersubjectivity, see Fazakas, Le clignotement du soi, 31-63, which
focuses on later texts by Richir.
15 PE 267-91.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
151

Husserl's texts to unleash his phantasia-based inquiry into the originary institution of the
apperception of the other.
As I pointed out, Richir's analyses of Husserl's texts, which are quoted in Richir's own
translation into French, are carried out in light of his overall project of revision and
refoundation of standard genetic phenomenology.16 Richir constantly transcribes Hus-
serl's analysis into his own lexicon and here and there diverts from his close-reading
to expand the consequences of this transcription for his project. My examination aims
to test the reading hypothesis that I advanced above by focusing on the most signiﬁcant
shifts of Richir's analyses from their source. To this extent, I will ﬁrst summarize the tra-
jectory of Husserl's texts and later I will discuss Richir's original reelaboration of them
into his own non-standard genetic analyses.
1. The Phenomenological Attestation of Phantasia
In Section I §§8-9, Richir focuses on text n.10, where Husserl raises the question concern-
ing how the actual I and Leib are implicated in Phantasie (as Phantasie-Ich and Phanta-
sieleib) and ends up asking whether it is in the representation of the other's lived
experiences that this implication is revealed. Husserl thus seems to ﬁnd in this under-
standing of the representation of the other the solution to the troubles that his phenom-
enological analysis stumbled on while describing the implication of the I, especially in the
case of absorbed phantasy (like in awaken dreams). Within the framework of the analyses
carried out in Section I, Richir oﬀers a two-step reading of Husserl's text. First, by empha-
sizing the speciﬁc case of absorption, Richir focuses on the articulation of the questions of
the implication of the actual I in phantasia and of the phenomenological status of the
Phantasie-Ich and Phantasieleib. Secondly, he builds on Husserl's description of the rep-
resentation of the other's lived experiences to sketch his non-standard and phantasia-
based genetic account of the apperception of the other. It is through the mimetic play
of phantasia, which, as we will see later, Richir considers more archaic than the Stiftung
of the real I and Leibkörper, that the apperception of the other takes place.
1.1. The Phantasieleib and Kinestheses in Phantasia
In what follows, I will start by spelling out the analyses oﬀered by Husserl in text n.10 and
commented by Richir in §8 and, later, I will cast light on the interpretative shifts made by
Richir that allows him to reinscribe Husserl's text into his new genetic project. Husserl
begins by raising the question about how I am implicated (Ich dabei bin) in phantasy,
given that this implication should be the characteristic trait of every presentiﬁcation
(Vergegenwärtigung).17 For Husserl, every time I represent a world of phantasy (Phanta-
siewelt) I am translated into this world, whether by being the subject of the intentional
lived experiences that I phantasize, namely, reproductive lived experiences, or by
ﬁnding myself into the other that would be the subject of these experiences.18 Take
the example of the presentiﬁcation of a sound: I phantasize it as belonging to the ﬂow
16 A partial French edition of Husserl's Hua XIII, including the two texts examined by Richir, is published in French in the
year subsequent to the publication of PE. Cf. Husserl, Sur l'intersubjectivité, 304-13 (vol. I) and 30-56 (vol. II).
17 For a standard reading of Husserl's phenomenology of phantasy, see Bernet 75-117.
18 Hua XIII, 298-99.
152
M. SENATORE

of the reproductive lived experiences that I have (myself, or the other into which I ﬁnd
myself); in other words, I phantasize it in such a way that I (or my alter ego) hear (-s) it so
to speak. The same holds for all the other phantasized lived experiences. Husserl pushes
his analysis further by considering the case in which I am absorbed in my phantasy. For
example, when I phantasize a tense navy battle or I contemplate a moving picture.19 In
both cases, although it is not my actual, real or empirical I that I ﬁnd in the phantasized/
contemplated world, in the present, I do have the lived experience of what I am phanta-
sizing/contemplating, I am implicated with my living body (Leib) in the phantasized/
contemplated world.20 Hence Husserl argues that the I implicated in the absorbed phan-
tasy is other than the determinate empirical I with its determinate living body; it is the
indeterminate I of phantasy (Phantasie-Ich), with an indeterminate body (Phantasieleib)
and personality, to the extent that the objects it experiences are in turn indeterminate and
ﬂoating in phantasy. As Husserl explains further, in these cases, I don't have an objective
experience but I intend the phantasized object in an obscure and incomplete way, like a
phantasized apparition that carries with itself the course of phantasized kinesthetic sen-
sations and the related sensible ﬁelds.21 Therefore, Husserl argues that, despite the jux-
taposition of the Phantasie-Ich to the real I, the former does not coincide with the latter.
Something of myself and my living body is implicated in the phantasized lived experi-
ences, there are traces of it, and yet it is neither my empirical I nor my empirical
living body.22 What kind of modiﬁcation of the latter is thus the Phantasie-Ich? Husserl
concludes that, ﬁnally, one should speak more properly of two Is, that is, of the Phanta-
sie-Ich as merely an analogon of the real I.23 For this reason, Husserl goes back to the
initial series of questions concerning the ways in which the I is implicated in phantasy,
where he wondered if I can presentify the lived experience of the other. At this point of
his inquiry, since we have grasped that the Phantasie-Ich is not exactly the same as my
real I, Husserl asks himself whether phantasy would allow myself to represent a plurality
of other Is.24 In doing so, Husserl uncovers the relation between the implication of the I
in phantasy and the apperception of the other, which he examines later in his text.
Richir's close-reading of this text focuses on Husserl's inquiry into the cases of absorp-
tion as he ﬁnds there the transition from the architectonic register of the Stiftung of
imagination to that of phantasia that he had brought to light in the previous sessions
of PE Section I. Thus, Richir takes Husserl's analysis of the navy battle as his point of
departure for an original non-standard exploration of the phenomenological status
of the Phantasie-Ich and Phantasieleib. Richir highlights that the latter, that is, the
subject and living body implicated in the lived experiences associated to the phantasized
battle, are not the real I and Leibkörper that are at work in the worldly perceptual experi-
ence temporalized in the present. The Phantasieleib, he argues, should be understood as
being still the Leib, a trace of which, as we know from Husserl, is retained in absorption,
but as split from the empirical body, the Körper, that situates it among the other things in
the world and the present. It should be taken as prior to the Stiftung of the body proper,
19 Ibid., 300-01.
20 On Husserl's concept of Leib, see Heinämaa, "On the transcendental undercurrents of phenomenology."
21 Hua XIII, 302. On the Husserlian concepts of kinesthesia and sensible ﬁelds, see Taipale 21-66.
22 Hua XIII, 304.
23 Ibid., 306.
24 Ibid., 306.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
153

the Leibkörper, that anchors the Leib to the real I (we will see more about it later).25 Richir
writes:
Phantasieleib is anything else but a "centre of orientation," the Nullpunkt, which is neither a
point nor a centre localizable in the real body and space, but, so to speak, the element of space
or the cell of spatialization from which orientation takes place [...] If there is a diﬀerence
between an eﬀectively real Leib and the Phantasieleib, it amounts to the fact that, being
deprived of all Korperlichkeit objectively localizable among things, the Leiblichkeit appears,
with the Phantasieleib, as reduced to the Nullpunkt [...] The Phantasieleib is the spatializing
as well as spatialized element in phantasia. And this is why wanting to ﬁx it makes no sense.26
On Richir's reading, here Husserl touches on the limits of the standard phenomenological
analysis, as Husserl himself seems to suggest by acknowledging the troubles that he has in
giving a precise account of the subject and the living body implicated in the absorbed
phantasy.27 For Richir, Husserl oﬀers a radical explanation of this trouble, which, at the
same time, opens the way for an alternative non-standard phenomenological description
of the Phantasieleib. On the one hand, Husserl admits that his analysis cannot go further
since we are in the world of phantasia, which, as he had put in his 1904-05 lectures, is
wholly other than the world of perception and is temporalized in presence. "It is
because of phantasia," Richir summarizes, "that keeps playing in the image [...] that an
active indetermination of the Leib perceiving the image is at work."28 Therefore, the Phan-
tasieleib is the spatializing and spatialized cell of phantasia that Richir had described
above, indeterminate and unﬁgurable by deﬁnition. On the other hand, Richir draws
on Husserl's argument to explain how one can circumvent the limits of the standard phe-
nomenological analysis (Husserl himself will do it later). "Phantasia by itself," Richir
observes, "can only be pre-comprehended by means of transpassibility," that is,
through the irruption and operativity of the Phantasie-Ich and Phantasieleib in the real
I and Leibkörper in the present.29 Here a non-standard genetic phenomenology enters
the scene, which ﬁnds in this operativity the traces of the more archaic activity of phan-
tasia transposed into the founded architectonic register of perception.
By bringing his phenomenological analysis of the Phantasieleib further, Richir
wonders about what we should understand by the kinestheses at work in phantasia
and thus related to that of the Leib which is implicated in phantasia. Here, he puts
forward a hypothesis that will be tested in his later genetic analyses of the apperception
of the other. If the Phantasieleib is the Leib prior to the Stiftung of the empirical Leibkör-
per, namely, dissociated from the Körper, Richir suggests, "it happens as if kinestheses
could take place without setting the Körper or the Leibkörper in motion."30 This, accord-
ing to Richir, tells us something about the modiﬁed exercise of phantasia that consists in
the mimesis of the other's Leib, which, as we will see later, Husserl detects at work in the
25 For an introduction to Richir's Leib-Philosophie, see Schnell, Le sens se faisant, 82-89, which argues for a continuity with
the project of recasting transcendental subjectivity in terms of Leiblichkeit undertaken by Merleau-Ponty in his Phé-
noménologie de la perception (1945).
26 PE 137.
27 On Husserl's trouble in enacting the phenomenological reduction in/of the awaken dream, see Richir's analysis of
lecture 44 of the second part of Husserl's course on Erste Philosophie (1924) in PE 116-34.
28 Ibid., 138.
29 Ibid., 138. On "transpassibility," as the possibility of the blind metamorphosis of phenomenological foundations,
through a coherent deformation, into the architectonic register of the founded symbolical institution (and on trans-
possibility, as the reversed possibility), see Richir and Carlson 183-86.
30 PE 141.
154
M. SENATORE

so-called intersubjective encounter.31 This mimesis, as Richir observes, "cannot be at all
originarily specular," a mimesis of images or mirroring, "but of a wholly other order."32
As these remarks on Husserl's text suggest, for Richir, Husserl starts from examining the
implication of the real I in Phantasie and ends up by discovering the work of Phantasie in
the representation of the other. From Richir's perspective, this work leads us back to the
register of phantasia and Phantasieleib, that is prior to the Stiftungen of imagination and
perception as well as of the real I and Leibkörper, and is mimetic in the aforementioned
non-specular and active sense.
1.2. The Nomadic Circulation of Phantasia
In §9, Richir focuses on the remaining part of text n.10. Here Husserl oﬀers an exemplary
description of the apprehension of the stranger body as the other's living body, which
provides him with a response to both questions about how I can represent to myself
the other's lived experiences and how the Phantasie-Ich and Phantasieleib can be attested.
Richir builds on this scene to draft his own genetic analysis of the apperception of the
other, which he fully unfolds in PE Section II. Husserl starts by raising the question of
intersubjectivity in an explicit way, thus asking how I can represent another I considering
that what is given to me is given in a speciﬁc way and that this speciﬁc mode of donation
is that of the apparition of my absolute subjectivity.33 His working hypothesis is that I
should ﬁnd in my ﬁeld of subjective experiences the representations and apparitions
of a subject that is not myself and has its own subjective ﬁeld of experience. The
problem would be, then, what these representations and apparitions amount to.
Husserl rejects the options of the imaginary and analogical simulation, by which either
I reproduce in my lived experience the image of the other's or I transpose my lived
experience in the other's living body.34 The problem with the image, for Husserl, is
that it allows for an immediate representation of what is not present, the other, precisely.
Therefore, he argues for an apprehension that comprehends from within and consists in
an immediate apprehension of the non-present present, motivated by an external percep-
tion. Furthermore, he illustrates this apprehension by resorting to an exemplary scene. Let
us assume that I can represent some sensible ﬁelds only if I set mine in action, Husserl
suggests, then, a certain juxtaposition (Deckung) or infringement (Überscheibung) is
required for the apprehension of a stranger body as the other's living body. "If I see a
stranger hand, I feel mine, if a stranger hand moves, this cause me move mine, and so
forth," Husserl explains.35 In the footnote related to this text, Husserl remarks that this
scene puts all theories about the analogical representation of another I out of service.
At this point, the two questions underpinning Husserl's search, that of the implication
of the I in phantasy and that of the apprehension of the other living body, ﬁnd a
31 Ibid., 143.
32 Ibid., 141.
33 Hua XIII, 308.
34 Ibid., 311.
35 Ibid., 311: "Da ich immerfort Sinnesfelder habe, ausgefüllte, so kommt es, dass ich nicht Sinnesfelder vorstellen kann,
ohne dabei meine aktuellen Sinnesfelder in Erregung zu versetzen. Eine gewisse Deckung, Überscheibung tritt ein.
Sehe ich eine fremde Hand, so fühle ich meine Hand, bewegt sich eine fremde Hand, so juckt es mich, meine
Hand zu bewegen usw." As Taipale remarks, "Husserl is not referring to an external similarity" but to "the lived-
body as a whole." Therefore, Taipale explains, the movement of one's own hand "appears as if not generated by
an external cause, but by itself," "as an expression of spontaneity" (Phenomenology and Embodiment, 83).
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
155

shared response. In fact, Husserl concludes that empathy (Einfühlung), understood as the
apprehension described above, is one of the possible ways to attest the Phantasie-Ich and
Phantasieleib.36 However, the text does not end here but relaunches the question concern-
ing what we should understand by Einfühlung.37 Husserl formulates this question in a way
that links the apperception of the other's living body to the apperception of my living body
and thus opens a path of research that he investigates further in a subsequent text included
in Hua XIII (n.13). I apprehend a hand as mine so long as it is given to me in the mode of a
zero-apparition, that is, in the characteristic orientation surrounding the zero-point that is
the living body.38 The same should work for the other's hand: it should be given in the
mode of zero-apparition in order for the body, similar to mine, that it is in cohesion
with, to be represented as a living body. Therefore, Husserl asks, how can I confer the
form of a zero-apparition to an external body?
In his remarks on this remaining part of text n.10, Richir further develops his
interpretation of the implication of phantasia in the apprehension of the other. There-
fore, on the one hand, he reads Husserl's option against the imaginary and analogical
simulation of the other's lived experiences as a rejection of the role of imagination in
the apprehension of the other, which in that case would be reduced to a Körper and
thus missed in its Leiblichkeit.39 On the other hand, Richir subscribes to Husserl's
deﬁnition of an immediate apprehension of a non-present present mediated by the per-
ception of its external body. Richir ﬁnds in this deﬁnition an account of the modiﬁed
exercise of phantasia that is at work in the apperception of the other, in which I presentify
something, the other's Leib, that is not present and yet eﬀectively existing and living.40 In
particular, Richir focuses on the exemplary scene of the other's hand provided by Husserl
to unfold his original interpretation of this work characteristic of phantasia. According to
Richir, here Husserl describes the implication of the Phantasieleib that is required to rep-
resent the sensible ﬁelds of the other's living body.41 This implication, Richir goes on,
consists in the mimetic play of phantasia that, as we learned, cannot be specular but is
active and from within, since it does not get the empirical I and Leibkörper involved.
For Richir, this mimesis must be understood as a distinctive skill of the human body
as it makes the latter so to speak intersubjective by deﬁnition, that is, available to the
apprehension of the other human body. Furthermore, it provides the basis, the basic
making of sense or attunement, for subsequent more complex exchanges of sense in
which symbolical institutions are at stake. Richir writes:
It is from within, and actively, that my Leib is implicated by the other Leib, and this occurs
because the latter's movement is understood from within, immediately, without the consti-
tution of an image and reasoning. We may say that this is, in its paradoxical structure, the
essential characteristic of the human Leib: it is easy to understand that no transmission of
sense is possible, no education, no symbolical institution, and thus no humanity without
this active, internal and non-specular mimesis of the human Leib.42
36 Ibid., 312. On Husserl's treatment of empathy in Hua XIII, see Lorelle.
37 Ibid., 313.
38 For Husserl's notion of zero-point, see Summa 252-65, and Taipale 60-61.
39 PE 144-45. On Richir's analyses of imaginary intersubjectivity, see Senatore, "Pathologies of Imagination and
Aﬀectivity."
40 PE 145.
41 Ibid., 145.
42 Ibid., 145.
156
M. SENATORE

As Richir seems to suggest, the kinestheses in phantasia mobilized in this mimesis are
shared by all the human bodies and thus draw on a register that is prior to the Stiftung
of the I and the Leibkörper, which separates my human body from the other's. This does
not mean that the apperception of the other consists in the duplication of an established
sense; on the contrary, as we will see, it brings the making of sense further and undergirds
the symbolical institution of intentional sense. Later, Richir demarcates the kinestheses in
action in this apperception from the actualization of potentialities ﬁxated in the Leib as
habitualities and thus involving the Stiftung of the I and the Leibkörper. The kinestheses
at stake here would reveal a kind of anonymous functioning that is prior to that Stiftung
and thus exonerated from any subjective titular.43
In the remainder of §9, Richir builds on Husserl's claim that the Phantasie-Ich and the
Phantasieleib can be attested through empathy to draw the implications of his reading of
text n.10. We should not understand by this, Richir observes, that the Leib is made visible
"itself and by itself."44 Alternatively, the apperception of the other testiﬁes to the play of
phantasia, by which, as I will show later, each Leib is somehow phenomenalized in its
distinctive indetermination and inﬁgurability at an architectonic register that is prior
to the constitution of real subjects, that is, to the Leib's attachment to the Körper in
the Stiftung of the Leibkörper. As Richir puts it, empathy proves that
phantasia is in "action" and thus the Phantasie-Ich and Phantasieleib too, in a "circulation"
that escapes the actual subject (even the actual subjects) [my emphasis] and make them
encounter from within their inﬁgurability and indeterminacy, prior to imagining, by rep-
resentation and in an intentional present, the possible sensible ﬁelds of the other with
their possible singularities.45
By pushing this interpretation further, Richir observes that no transposition into the
other is required for the apperception under scrutiny since a kind of pre-comprehension
is at stake in it, made possible by this nomadic circulation that testiﬁes to the vitality of
phantasia. As Richir will explain later in greater detail, this circulation should be thought
as a phase of presence in which two phases accord with one another, the one of the other's
Leib that is a non-present present for me and thus is temporalized in presence, like an
apparition of phantasia, and the one of my mimetic representation that aims to match
with the other phase although it is irreducibly delayed.
2. Non-standard Genetic Analyses
In PE Section II, chapter 3 §§3-4, Richir puts his non-standard genetic phenomenology
to the test of the most elementary apperceptions of consciousness. He starts with the
genetic analysis of the Stiftung of the perceptual apperception and goes on with that of
the apperceptions of remembering, of phantasia and of the other, by concluding with lin-
guistic apperceptions. In the texts discussed here, Richir develops more explicitly the
genetic project already sketched in Section I §§8-9, by oﬀering a more complete
account of all the phenomenological and symbolical elements of consciousness that,
43 Ibid., 269. This point is remarkable as it suggests that another self, that is not the real I, an ipseity, as Richir calls it
elsewhere, is associated to the aforementioned kinesthetic series. On the recourse to anonymity in Husserl and
Merleau-Ponty, see Taipale 73-74.
44 Ibid., 148.
45 Ibid., 148.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
157

on his view, are involved in the apperception of the other. Therefore, he ﬁrst goes back to
Husserl's text n.10 by engaging in a further reading of the exemplary scene of the infrin-
gement between my hand and the other's. This time, he argues that the mimetic play of
phantasia that makes the apperception of the other possible is the accord between my
Leib and the other's Leib that allows for the awakening of their mutual ﬁgurability in
horizon within the Stiftung of my Leibkörper and the other's. Therefore, the apperception
of the other consists of the apperceptions of phantasia that respond in echo, thus, with
some irreducible delay, to this phenomenalization of the Leib. Later, Richir oﬀers a close-
reading of text n.13, where Husserl takes up the concluding question of text n.10 con-
cerning how I can confer the form of the zero-apparition to a stranger body. In text
n.13, Husserl responds to this question by having recourse to the idea of a presentiﬁca-
tion of the internal apparition of the other's living body motivated by the latter's external
apparition. Furthermore, Husserl illustrates this idea by measuring the comprehension of
the other against that of linguistic signs. Richir builds on Husserl's idea of the presentiﬁ-
cation of internal apparitions and on the comparative reading of this presentiﬁcation
against semiotic comprehension to further inquiry the kind of phenomena that are phe-
nomenalized in the apperception of the other (the anything-but-phenomenon and
language phenomena).
2.1. The Phenomenalization of the Leib
As we have already seen, in text n.10, Husserl focuses on the diﬀerence between my
apperception of my living body and that of the other's. He explains that, while I can
apperceive my living body through the perception of external data that are originarily
given as belonging to my sensible ﬁelds, the other's hand is not mine so long as it is
given as an external body (Körper) that does not belong to my tactile ﬁeld.46 The same
holds for the other's lived experiences: I can represent them in an intuitive but not per-
ceptual way, above all, not originarily, as if they were my lived experiences.47 Here, as we
know, Husserl raises the question concerning whether this representation can be an ima-
ginary and analogical simulation and puts it aside immediately. For Husserl, I can only
apprehend the other from within, through the immediate apprehension of something
present and non-present, at once, which is mediated by the perception of an external
body.48 Therefore, he has recourse to the exemplary scene of the infringement
between the other's hand that I see in motion and my hand that this sight makes me
move.49 In the text from §3, which I examine here, Richir draws on the distinction
made by Husserl between the two apperceptions in order to further reﬁne his description
of the architectonic transpositions and symbolical institutions involved in the appercep-
tion of the other. In particular, he focuses on the architectonic register of the Stiftung of
my Leibkorper in which the apperception of the other takes place and thus mimetic phan-
tasia is caught in action. Richir reformulates Husserl's description of the apperception of
my living body in light of his phantasia-based genetic phenomenology. Given the archi-
tectonic gap between phantasia/Phantasieleib and the I/Leibkörper, Richir understands
46 Hua XIII, 309-10.
47 Ibid., 310-11.
48 Ibid., 311.
49 Ibid. 311-12.
158
M. SENATORE

my apperception of my living body as a result of the architectonic transposition by which,
together with the experience of my sensible ﬁelds, I have the experience of something of
the Leib which passes into the Körper, so that the latter is originarily given as my living
body.50 This transposition is co-extensive with what Richir calls the symbolical insti-
tution of my Leibkörper, through which the Körper is apperceived as placed in the
Leib as in its horizon or profundity.51 Now, it is about this Leib and the lived experiences
that rest on it that, according to Richir, I apprehend in the apperception of the other. The
latter would thus be a modiﬁed kind of the apperception of phantasia in which something
of the Leib (the Körper's horizon or profundity), but not everything, would be given in
intuition. Richir builds on this point to advance a provisional genetic hypothesis about
the apperception of the other. He writes:
Therefore, there is a strong kinship between the apperception of phantasia and the one that
apprehends the other from within, that is, in its own lived experiences, by comprehending it.
However, here nothing of its lived experiences, as the apperceived object, has access to intui-
tiveness for me. Should we say that, for this reason, some apperceptions of phantasia pro-
ducing themselves in me, with their own characters, will somehow "ﬁll" or "supply" this lack
of intuitiveness? Would this occur because of the resonance, so to speak, between the
rhythm of their temporalization in presence and that which, as "a non-present present,"
is delivered from the other, in the encounter, as the rhythm of temporalization in presence
(without an assignable presence) of its own life?52
Later, Richir abandons this hypothesis, as he prefers to account for the apperceptions of
phantasia at work in the apperception of the other as a delayed response in echo to those
coming from the Leib playing in the profundity of the other's Leibkörper. Overall, he
suggests that this scene of unstable and fragile communication may be read as one poss-
ible way to unpack Husserl's idea of the intuitive but not originarily perceptual represent-
ability of the other's lived experience.53
Within this framework, Richir engages in a further interpretation of the exemplary
scene of the infringement between my hand and the other's. As we saw, the "intersubjec-
tive" encounter occurs through the apperception of the stranger hand as being part of the
other's Leibkörper and not as an external body or a thing. It is worth recalling that here
Richir puts the term intersubjective between phenomenological quotation marks since, as
we learned above, the encounter occurs before and beyond actual subjects (even if within
their symbolical institution). Now, in light of what has been said above, from Richir's per-
spective, this apperception is made possible as "the Leib plays like the profundity or
horizon of the Leibkörper, in which," given the Stiftung of my Leibkörper, "this hand
as well as mine are placed."54 In other words, it hinges on what Richir designates as
the ﬁgurability in horizon that the Leib gains through the architectonic transposition
into the Leibkörper corresponding to the latter's symbolical institution. Therefore, for
Richir, the infringement described by Husserl consists in the accord or resonance (a
kind of echo-relation) that calls the Leib in the horizon or profundity of each Leibkörper
into play and thus awakes its peculiar ﬁgurability. As Richir puts it:
50 PE 271-72.
51 Ibid., 272.
52 Ibid., 273.
53 Ibid., 273-74.
54 Ibid., 274.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
159

By infringement, covering or sliding in juxtaposition, that which is Leib in my Leibkörper
accords itself with what is Leib in the Leibkörper of the other, thus awakening itself to ﬁgur-
ability, and this 'accord' is the encounter itself. This occurs since what is Leib in my Leibkör-
per, being unable to ﬁgure itself as such, given its indetermination with regards to any
apperceptions, encounters, together with what is Leib in the other's Leibkörper, something
of this impossible ﬁguration that we may call "in horizon."55
Richir ﬁnds in this accord that awakes the only possible phenomenalization of the Leib
(the latter's ﬁgurability in horizon within the Leibkörper) the resource for the extraordi-
nary power of the non-specular mimesis from within that is characteristic of the human
body and makes the human Leibkörper "immediately intersubjective."56 Here again,
Richir points out that the accord does not consist in the mirroring of a given sense: it
does not mean that "we, humans, have always already had the same apperceptions
(that can be traced back to an eidetics or a more or less ideal a priori)."57 On the contrary,
it provides us with the basic attunement that makes further instituted sense in principle
transmissible to others to the extent that it draws on the Leib and its ﬁgurability ("by acti-
vation of the potential profundities of the Leib inhabiting the Leibkörper").58 This seems
to suggest that the Leib and the inchoative mass of kinestheses that rest on it are not
merely anonymous or, in other words, that the latter is transpassible with regards to sym-
bolical institutions as much as these institutions are transpassible with regards to it.
Although I cannot discuss this point here, I remark that, on my view, it touches on
the most signiﬁcant diﬃculties that follow from Richir's concept of the Leib. Moreover,
Richir designates this phenomenalization of the Leib, oscillating between absolute
inﬁgurability and indeterminacy and the stabilized form of the Körper, as "phenomeno-
logical blinking [clignotement]."59 It testiﬁes to the life of Leib and lived experiences, as
prior to the Stiftung of the Leibkörper that divides them into my lived experiences and the
other's, which, in Richir's lexicon, amounts to the phenomenality of the anything-but-
phenomenon (rien que phénomène).60 Therefore, Richir ﬁnds in this phenomenalization
the articulation between the life of consciousness to which the genetic analyses developed
in PE apply and those phenomenological regions, more archaic than consciousness,
which he had examined in his earlier works. As Richir puts it, "it is because of these
ﬂashes or bits of phenomenality that the Leib is ﬁgured, even if only horizontally, in
the Leibkörper's apperceptions that are transpassible to it."61 At this point, Richir
revises his initial hypothesis about the genesis of the apperception of the other by
suggesting that we should rather understand it as the response in echo, thus delayed,
to the phenomenalization of the other's Leib, which is phenomenalized in turn as a
phase of presence without an assignable present within the complex phase of presence
of the encounter.62 From this, there follows that the encounter with the other challenges
55 Ibid., 275. It is worth noting that here, Richir explicitly demarcates his idea of Leib from Merleau-Ponty's late conception
of "chair." On this point, see Richir, "La phénoménologie de Husserl dans la philosophie de Merleau-Ponty. Questions
phénoménologiques."
56 Ibid., 275.
57 Ibid., 274.
58 Ibid., 275.
59 Ibid., 275.
60 Ibid., 275-76. On this kind of phenomenality, which the hyperbolical epoché of phantasia reveals, see PE 474-506.
61 Ibid., 276.
62 Ibid., 275.
160
M. SENATORE

the Stiftung of the Leibkörper and thus the separation of my lived experience from the
other's, within which it takes place. Richir writes:
This means that what is at play between us, in the encounter, or rather what lets itself be
recognized, seized or anticipated by apperception, are the complexes of retentions/proten-
tions of presence of the sense making itself [le sens qui se fait]. This has the eﬀect of unhor-
sing the Jemeinigkeit [the being-mine of lived experiences] as well as the Jeseinigkeit in this
"between" without present. The apperceptions at play in the "intersubjective" encounter, if
they are taken as that which makes the Stiftung of Jemeinigkeit and Jeseinigkeit vacillate, are
closest to the apperceptions of phantasia.63
In other words, as Richir explains further, we should think that, in the "between" of the
encounter and thus in the blinking of the Leib, some phantasia apparitions are caught or
sucked into a nomadic and presubjective circulation, which testiﬁes to mimetic phantasia
in action and makes their subsequent subjective split, due to the Stiftung of the Jemeinig-
keit, tremble.64 In light of this non-standard reinterpretation Husserl's text, once again
Richir draws attention to Husserl's ending question concerning the concept of zero-
apparitions, as it opens a new path of research. Provisionally, Richir explains that the
zero-point consists in the Leib as it is architectonically transposed into the horizon of
the Körper in the Stiftung of the Leibkörper and thus in the apperception of my living
body.65 Therefore, the internal or zero-apparition designates the closest apperception
of the Leib that I can have, as well as the way the Körper appears to me in the appercep-
tion of my living body. I do not apperceive everything of my body, Richir explains, and
yet I apperceive something of it that "in its multiple variations and ﬂuctuations of
apparitions, does not stop [...] 'adhering' to my perceptual apperceptions of the things
of the world and thus more globally to my apperception of the world."66 Now, the
question raised by Husserl in the ﬁnal paragraph of text n.10 consists in asking how
I can posit in the Leibkörper of the other a kind of apparition, namely, the zero-appari-
tion, that I can never have as such from within the limits of my Leibkörper. In the next
section, I will examine how Husserl addresses this question in text n.13 and how Richir
interprets this text in light of his overall rereading of Husserl's phenomenology of
intersubjectivity.
2.2. Sense in the Making and Language Phenomena
To explain the transition from the perceived external body to the internal apparition, in
text n.13, Husserl resorts to presentiﬁcation again, versus imaginary and analogical sol-
utions. Furthermore, he illustrates his solution by measuring the kind of comprehension
involved in the apprehension of the other against semiotic comprehension. This com-
parative reading allows Husserl to cast light on the basic expressivity that makes
human living bodies comprehensible by one another. In §4, Richir builds on this discov-
ery to further elaborate on the phenomenality of the phenomena that are phenomena-
lized in the apperception of the other and, ﬁnally, to oﬀer an overview of his new
genetic analyses of this elementary apperception.
63 Ibid., 276-77.
64 Ibid., 278.
65 Ibid., 279.
66 Ibid., 279-80.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
161

From the beginning of text n.13, Husserl recalls that my living body is apperceived as
such, as the body of the subject of my lived experiences, through the internal apparitions
of the external body, that is, through the mode of apparition of the body as oriented
around my zero-point. In the case of the stranger body, I apprehend it as another
living body, and thus as a new empirical subject of lived experiences, that is, I perceive
it as a similar being, not through an originary donation but through a mere presentiﬁca-
tion.67 Husserl suggests that we acknowledge in this apprehension, or apperception, a
presentifying co-position that takes us from the external apparition to an internal one
that depends on a system of internal apparitions other than mine, on another living
body and I. Now, the question that Husserl raises at the end of text n.10 comes back
here: what makes this transposition of the external apparition of a stranger body into
a system of internal apparitions other than mine possible?68 Certainly, Husserl rejects
the hypothesis that the apperception under scrutiny here results from: (a) an imaginary
representation, through which, by being unable to transpose myself into the other, I rep-
resent to myself how I would feel if I were the other; (b) an analogization, through which
I suppose that the other feels the same as me when she is caught in the same circum-
stances. Husserl thus comes to the dramatic conclusion that, properly speaking, there
is no empathy.69 Alternatively, he argues for the apperception of the stranger body as a
living body and thus of its external apparition as an internal apparition. Once again,
Husserl understands this apperception as a comprehension from within. To explain
what this comprehensive and non-originary apprehension of the living body consists
in, Husserl compares the latter to the comprehension of linguistic signs. He starts by
highlighting the diﬀerence between the two: on the one hand, I intend through signs
something that goes along with but is alien to them; on the other, the stranger body
through which I understand the inside of a living corporeity belongs in the unity of
another living body.70 Later, Husserl draws attention to the shared feature of each com-
prehension: in no case I take my object as a merely physical object.71 The apprehension
always consists in a transition by which I presentify the internal apparition that the exter-
nal apparition of the body presupposes. Finally, my apperception of the other, namely, of
the subject as another empirical person, hinges on this reproductive internal apparition
that makes me apprehend the stranger body as the other's living body.72 In the ﬁnal para-
graphs of his text, Husserl summarizes the outcomes of his exploration as follows.73 First,
he remarks that in the case of the apperception of the other, I have a comprehensive and
not intuitive apprehension of the stranger body as a living body. Secondly, this appercep-
tion should be understood as a modiﬁcation of my self-apperception consisting in the
infringement with another body that is not absolutely similar to mine, and thus not in
a perfect coincidence (like in the case of an originary donation).
Richir transcribes Husserl's account of the comprehensive apprehension of the other
subject into the complex of architectonic transpositions and symbolical institutions that
67 Hua XIII, 333-34.
68 Ibid., 336.
69 Ibid., 338.
70 Ibid., 339.
71 On the trajectory of Husserl's treatment of gestural expressivity, see Heinämaa, "Embodiment and Expressivity in Hus-
serl's Phenomenology."
72 Ibid., 339.
73 Ibid., 342.
162
M. SENATORE

he had described in his previous session. The zero-apparition is understood as the appa-
rition of the Körper through which the Leib is given, not in an originary way, as the hor-
izonal inside of my internal apparitions, and the subject of my possible sensations and
kinestheses as well as lived experiences.74 As we know, this donation consists in the phe-
nomenological blinking of the anything-but-phenomenon within the symbolical insti-
tution of the Leibkörper and thus of lived experiences as mine. For this reason, Richir
explains this institution as "that of the Leibkörper as a Körper in internal apparition,
whose apparitions are carried by the Leib in the womb [au sein] of the anything-but-
phenomenon."75 Richir interprets Husserl's solution to the question raised at the end
of text n.10 and relaunched in text. n.13, about how to confer the internal apparition
to a stranger body, within this non-standard genetic framework. Speciﬁcally, he
focuses on Husserl's explanation of his solution (the comprehensive apprehension of
the other) through the comparison with semiotic comprehension. Richir draws on this
comparison to demonstrate that the phenomenalization at stake in the apperception of
the other is ultimately that of language (langage) phenomena, that is, of phenomenolo-
gical signs that adhere to the sense in the making and are prior to any symbolically insti-
tuted language (langue).76 This demonstration unfolds as a two-stage movement. First,
Richir shows that the quasi-semiotic relation between the Körper and the Leib, which
allows for the transition from external to internal apparitions, is prior to the symbolical
institution. "The Leiblichkeit of the Körper of the other and the life that animates it,"
Richir observes, "are phenomenologically [and not symbolically, I emphasize] well
motivated by the external apparitions of this Körper."77 In other words, he goes on,
"the expressions of the other, that is, its visible or perceptible Körper (gestures,
mimics, and so forth), do not consist in (arbitrary) signs in the sense of the signs of
an instituted language [langue]."78 Secondly, the transition from external to internal
apparitions occurs in the sense that I do not experience these apparitions originarily
but I presentify them in a reproductive way, that is, through what Richir designates as
the "internal, living and active mimesis" of phantasia. Therefore, as Richir puts it:
In the encounter, phantasia is certainly brought back to the Körper by the Stiftung of the
apperception of the Leibkörper, my Leibkörper and the other's, but it is because of the blink-
ing of the Leib in the encounter [...] that phantasia starts playing from its profundities [...]
and can operate as mimetic phantasia to presentify the lived experiences and apparitions
of the Leibkörper of the other.79
The institution of the self and the Leibkörper, which insularizes the Leib into the Körper,
works as a support to the nomadic and presubjective circulation of phantasia appercep-
tions. As Richir points out, this suggests that "a mimesis of the Leib by itself" is at work
here. However, we should not understand it as a duplication of the same since the ima-
ginary representation is put out of service from the beginning. According to Richir, we
74 Ibid., 281.
75 Ibid., 281.
76 For Richir's phenomenology of language, see Méditations phénoménologiques, 191-328, and Carlson, "Aproximaciones
richirianas a la fenomenología del lenguaje." It is worth noting that Richir further develops this phenomenology within
the framework of his non-standard genetic analyses in PE 166-84 and 329-92.
77 PE 284.
78 Ibid., 284.
79 Ibid., 284.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
163

have the encounter of two somehow singular phases of presence that form new mutual
interconnections between the complexes of retentions and protentions without an
assignable present that constitute each phase.80 Now, given that the expressions of the
Körper are not symbolically instituted, that is, linguistic (in the sense of langue), but
are phenomenological signs of the sense in the making in the encounter of phases,
Richir concludes that the phenomenalization at stake in the apperception of the other
concerns language phenomena (in the sense of langage).81 They draw on a phenomenality
that is prior to any symbolical institutions and thus testiﬁes to phantasia as the element of
articulation between this phenomenality and the symbolical institution of the self. There-
fore, Richir conceives of phantasia as the most archaic architectonic register of con-
sciousness since it constitutes the closest one to that phenomenality which can still be
attested within the institution of the self.82
In his ending remarks, Richir rereads the ﬁnal paragraphs of text n.13 to unpack the
outcomes of his new genetic analyses. As we have already seen, Husserl concludes that I
have a comprehensive and not intuitive apprehension of the other's living body and that
this apprehension can never solve into an originary donation. Richir builds on Husserl's
ﬁrst conclusion to develop his idea of the transpossibility at work in the encounter with
the other.83 If what is phenomenalized in the latter is something non-present that draws
on the profundities of the Leib, in Richir's lexicon, the mass of language phenomena,
then, the other's possibilities that can be revealed in the encounter are not in principle
eidetic possibilities, thus grounded on symbolical institutions, but more archaic possibi-
lities to which the former are transpassible. These possibilities, more precisely, transpos-
sibilities, are what makes the encounter non-predictable and thus brings the making of
sense further. Finally, Richir enforces this conclusion by oﬀering the following reading
of Husserl's second point. The fact that I can never have an internal apparition of the
other's living body as such constitutes the irreducible gap, or delay, from which
mimetic phantasia starts playing. For this reason, it is important for Richir to point
out again that, more than supplying the lack of intuitiveness in the apperception of
the other, this mimesis responds in echo to the apparitions of the other's living body.
As he recalls here, at the end of the session, by means of phantasia "I do not 'put
myself in the place of the other,' but 'marry,' 'accompany' or 'imitate' the sense prop-
osition that the other makes and to which I can respond by making it myself from
within the temporalization in presence."84
Conclusion
In the exploration oﬀered here, I have drawn attention to the non-standard phenomen-
ology of "intersubjectivity" that Richir develops in PE as a peculiar stage of his phantasia-
based genetic analyses, namely, the inquiry after the originary institution of the appercep-
tion of the other. I have demonstrated that this inquiry can be read as a reelaboration
of the idea of basic togetherness and attunement that characterizes the standard
80 Ibid., 285.
81 Ibid., 287.
82 Ibid., 288.
83 Ibid., 289.
84 Ibid., 290.
164
M. SENATORE

phenomenological account of empathy. This reelaboration is achieved through the orig-
inal interpretation of Husserl so-called phenomenology of intersubjectivity that Richir
develops in PE within the framework of his broader project of a non-standard revision
and refoundation of genetic phenomenology. As I have explained above, throughout
his engagement with the Husserlian source, Richir casts light on the mimetic play of
phantasia that underpins the apperception of the other that I carry out within the sym-
bolical institution of my I and Leibkörper. In doing so, he traces the aforementioned idea
of togetherness and attunement back to a register that he identiﬁes as the most archaic
one that is phenomenologically attestable and that operates as the articulation between
even more archaic registers, which he had explored in his previous work, and the mul-
tiple Stiftungen, examined in PE, which constitute the most elementary life of conscious-
ness. It is worth noting that, in the subsequent developments of his overall late project of
starting phenomenology over from phantasia, Richir pushes his analyses of "intersubjec-
tivity" further.85 This article wishes to be read as a ﬁrst step into the scrutiny of this
project.
Disclosure Statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the author(s).
Funding
This work was supported by Fondo Nacional de Desarrollo Cientíﬁco y Tecnológico, ANID Fon-
decyt Regular 1220218.
References
Bernet,
Rudolf.
Conscience
et
existence:
Perspectives
phénoménologiques.
Paris:
Presses
Universitaires de France, 2004.
Carlson, Sacha. "Aproximaciones richirianas a la fenomenología del lenguaje." Eikasia. Revista de
ﬁlosofía 47 (2013): 363-88.
Fazakas, Istzván. Le clignotement du soi. Genèse et institutions de l'ipséité. Mémoires des Annales de
Phénoménologie, 2020.
Forestier, Florian. La phénoménologie génétique de Marc Richir. Dordrecht: Springer, 2015.
Gondek, Hans-Dieter, and Laszlo Tengelyi. Neue Phänomenologie in Frankreich. Berlin:
Suhrkamp, 2011.
Heinämaa, Sara. "Embodiment and Expressivity in Husserl's Phenomenology: From Logical
Investigations to Cartesian Meditations." SATS 11 (2010): 1-15.
Heinämaa, Sara. "On the Transcendental Undercurrents of Phenomenology: The case of the
Living Body." Continental Philosophy Review 54 (2021): 237-257.
Husserl, Edmund. Analysen zur passiven Synthesis. Aus Vorlesungs- und Forschungsmanuskripten
1918-1926. Ed. Margot Fleischer. Den Haag: Martinus Nijhoﬀ, 1966 [Hua XI]
Husserl, Edmund. Zur Phänomenologie der Intersubjektivität. Texte aus dem Nachlass. Erster Teil
(1905-1920). Ed. Iso Kern. Den Haag: Martinus Nijhoﬀ, 1973 [Hua XIII]
Husserl, Edmund. Sur l'intersubjectivité (I-II). Ed. Natalie Depraz. Paris: PUF, 2001.
Kern,
Iso.
"Husserl's
Phenomenology
of
Intersubjectivity."
Husserl's
Phenomenology
of
Intersubjectivity Historical Interpretations and Contemporary Applications. Eds. Frode
Kjosavik, Christian Beyer, and Christel Fricke. New York: Routledge, 2019. 11-90.
85 See Phantasia, imagination and aﬀectivité (2004) and Fragments phénoménologiques sur l'espace et le temps (2006).
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
165

Lorelle, Paula. "Possibilité et impossibilité de l'empathie. La question de l'altérité dans les volumes
XIII, XIV et XV des Husserliana, Sur l'intersubjectivité." Vulnérabilité et empathie. Approches
phénoménologiques. Ed. Elodie Boublil. Paris: Hermann, 2018. 235-61.
Moran, Dermot. The Problem of Empathy: Lipps, Scheler, Husserl and Stein. In Amor Amicitiae.
On the Love that is Friendship, edited by Thomas Kelly and Philip Rosemann. Leuven: Peeters,
2004. 269-312.
Niel, Luis. In Perception, Aﬀectivity, and Volition in Husserl's Phenomenology. Ed. by Roberto
Walton, Shigeru Taguchi and Roberto Rubio. Cham: Springer, 2017. 137-62.
Ratcliﬀe, Matthew. "Phenomenology, Neuroscience, and Intersubjectivity." Companion to
Phenomenology and Existentialism. Eds. Hubert L. Dreyfus, and Mark A. Wrathall.
Chichester: Blackwell, 2006. 329-45.
Richir, Marc. Méditations phénoménologiques - Phénoménologie et phénoménologie du langage.
Grenoble: Editions Jérôme Million, 1992.
Richir, Marc. Phénoménologie en esquisses - Nouvelles fondations Grenoble. Grenoble: Editions
Jérôme Million, 2000.
Richir, Marc. "La phénoménologie de Husserl dans la philosophie de Merleau-Ponty. Questions
phénoménologiques." Philosopher en français. Ed. Jean-François Mattéi. Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France, 2001. 183-200.
Richir,
Marc.
Phantasia,
imagination,
aﬀectivité
-
Phénoménologie
et
anthropologie
phénoménologique. Grenoble: Editions Jérôme Million, 2004.
Richir, Marc. Fragments phénomènologiques sur le temps et l'espace. Grenoble: Editions Jérôme
Million, 2006.
Richir, Marc, and Sacha Carlson. L'écart et le rien. Conversations avec Sacha Carlson. Grenoble:
Editions Jérôme Million, 2015.
Scheler, Max. The Nature of Sympathy. Trans. Peter Heath. New York: Routledge, 2008.
Schnell, Alexander. Temps et Phénomène. La phénoménologie husserlienne du temps (1893-1918).
Hildesheim: Olms Weidmann, 2004.
Schnell, Alexander. Le sens se faisant. Marc Richir et la refondation de la phénoménologie transcen-
dantale. Bruxelles: Ousia, 2011.
Senatore, Mauro. "Pathologies of Imagination and Aﬀectivity: The Genesis of the Unconscious in
Marc Richir." Front Psychiatry 14 (2023): 119793.
Senatore, Mauro. "Where Do Centaurs Come From? A Non-Standard Interpretation of Husserl's
Doctrine of Phantasia." Discipline ﬁlosoﬁche, XXXIII, 2 (2023): 185-207.
Stein, Edith. On the Problem of Empathy. Trans. by Waltraut Stein. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic
Publishers Group, 1989.
Summa, Michela. Spatio-temporal Intertwining Husserl's Transcendental Aesthetic. Dordrecht:
Springer, 2014.
Taipale, Joona. Phenomenology and Embodiment: Husserl and the Constitution of Subjectivity.
Evanston: Northwestern Unviersity Press, 2014.
Walsh, Philip J. "Husserl on other minds." The Husserlian Mind. Ed. Jacobs. Hanne. New York:
Routledge, 2022. 257-69.
Zahavi, Dan. Self and Other Exploring Subjectivity, Empathy, and Shame. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2014.
166
M. SENATORE

