European Journal of Physiotherapy
ISSN: 2167-9169 (Print) 2167-9177 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/iejp20
The meaning and feasibility of engaging in
physical activity while being employed in people
with mild to moderate disability due to multiple
sclerosis: a qualitative study
Maria Grytvik Hartvedt, Britt Normann, Shaun Gallagher & Ellen Christin
Arntzen
To cite this article: Maria Grytvik Hartvedt, Britt Normann, Shaun Gallagher & Ellen
Christin Arntzen (2025) The meaning and feasibility of engaging in physical activity
while being employed in people with mild to moderate disability due to multiple
sclerosis: a qualitative study, European Journal of Physiotherapy, 27:4, 219-229, DOI:
10.1080/21679169.2024.2385325
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/21679169.2024.2385325
© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Informa
UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis
Group
View supplementary material 
Published online: 08 Aug 2024.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 674
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=iejp20

European Journal of Physiotherapy
2025, VOL. 27, NO. 4, 219-229
The meaning and feasibility of engaging in physical activity while being 
employed in people with mild to moderate disability due to multiple 
sclerosis: a qualitative study
Maria Grytvik Hartvedta, Britt Normanna,b 
, Shaun Gallagherc,d and Ellen Christin Arntzena,e 
aNord University, Bodø, Norway; bNordland Hospital Thrust, Bodø, Norway; cDepartment of Philosophy, University of Memphis, Memphis, 
United States; dSchool of Liberal Arts, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, NSW, Australia; eDepartment of Physiotherapy, Kongsgården 
Physiotherapy, Bodø, Norway
ABSTRACT
Purpose:  To understand the perceptions of the meaning and feasibility of physical activity (PA) while 
employed for people with multiple sclerosis (pwMS).
Materials and methods:  A qualitative design, using individual in-depth interviews of 26 employed 
pwMS with mild to moderate disability. The interviews were analysed using systematic text condensation 
in a phenomenological hermeneutic framework informed by a pattern theory of self. A systematic and 
dynamic process was used to develop categories of the most salient content and meaning.
Results:  Three categories were developed: (1) Meaningfulness of PA for work, (2) Balancing daily life, PA, 
and work when energy is low, and (3) Leisure PA during work hours is beneficial but challenging to 
implement. The findings highlight that PA can be perceived meaningful for health, function, life balance, 
identity, their perceived abilities, possibilities, and challenges in relation to work, all influencing self-perception. 
The participants perceived the feasibility of PA to be influenced by work, private life, and work-life balance, 
particularly highlighting physical function, organisational structures and arrangements, and social and 
normative practices to be important. An arrangement of implementing leisure PA during working hours was 
recognised as a beneficial work accommodation when it was perceived feasible and accepted.
Conclusion:  Employed pwMS may perceive PA as meaningful for their health, function, and work, 
influencing self-perception and perceived work capabilities. Its feasibility may be influenced by individual, 
environmental, and/or social aspects. Thus, individualised work adjustments to facilitate PA, like 
accommodating for leisure PA during work hours, can ultimately facilitate both PA and employment.
Introduction
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory disorder of 
the central nervous system that leads to a range of 
sensory-motor and cognitive challenges [1], low levels of phys­
ical activity (PA) [2], unemployment, and part-time work [3,4]. 
These challenges are prevalent not only in those with severe 
disabilities but also in individuals with mild to moderate dis­
abilities [2,3,5], resulting in considerable societal and personal 
burdens [5-7]. Unemployed people with MS (pwMS) are less 
active than their employed counterparts [8]; however, 
employed pwMS report that they limit their PA to conserve 
energy for work [9]. Several other barriers to PA are experi­
enced by the MS population such as symptom fluctuations, 
frustrations with bodily limitations, and time management [10].
On the other hand, participation in PA can mitigate MS 
symptoms that are known to be associated with unemploy­
ment such as fatigue [11], mobility [12], and hand function 
[13], and can lead to increased participation in everyday life 
contexts [12,14] and social activities [10]. Associations 
between physical and mental health, satisfaction, and occu­
pational performance have been reported [15]. PwMS per­
ceives PA as an approach for managing, alleviating and 
preventing MS symptoms, and maintaining or improving 
physical function [16,17], identity [17], and self-efficacy [18]. 
Improving self-efficacy can positively affect work performance 
[19] and working hours for individuals with MS [20]. According 
to the pattern theory of self (PTS), behaviours, actions, abili­
ties, and bodily sensations are closely related to individuals' 
self-concept and can affect individuals' possibilities in the 
world [21,22]. A recent study concluded that improvements 
in physical functions, activities and participation changed 
how pwMS looked at themselves and at their opportunities 
and affordances in daily life [14]. The existing research on MS 
lacks attention to the potential of facilitating PA as a reason­
able work adjustment or as a component of vocational reha­
bilitation services [19,23,24]. In particular, there is a lack of 
reporting on first-hand experiences of participation in PA in 
relation to work, such as the meaning of PA for work and the 
© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
CONTACT Maria Grytvik Hartvedt 
 maria.g.hartvedt@nord.no 
 Nord University, Bodø, Norway.
 Supplemental data for this article can be accessed online at https://doi.org/10.1080/21679169.2024.2385325.
https://doi.org/10.1080/21679169.2024.2385325
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, 
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. The terms on which this article has been published allow the posting of the Accepted 
Manuscript in a repository by the author(s) or with their consent.
ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 5 February 2024
Revised 16 July 2024
Accepted 22 July 2024
KEYWORDS
Multiple sclerosis; 
employment; work; 
physical activity; exercise; 
phenomenology
Research Article

220
M. GRYTVIK HARTVEDT ET AL.
possibility of engaging in PA while being employed. Such 
knowledge may enable the development of proactive sup­
port for sustained employment and PA in the early phases of 
MS, when disability is low. We understand PA not only in 
terms of "bodily movement produced by skeletal muscles 
that results in energy expenditure" [25], but also in terms of 
being inherently cognitive, affective, psychological, social, sit­
uated, and political [26]. Therefore, this paper adopts a com­
prehensive definition of PA: "Physical activity involves people 
moving, acting and performing within culturally specific 
spaces and contexts, and is influenced by a unique array of 
interests, emotions, ideas, instructions and relationships." [26]. 
This definition allows for a more holistic perspective in the 
analyses, embracing PA's inherent complexity.
In light of this background, our paper aims to understand 
the perceptions and reflections of employed pwMS with mild 
to moderate disability regarding (1) the meaning of PA in rela­
tion to work, and (2) the possibilities of engaging in PA while 
being employed. This is meant to uncover new insights for fur­
ther developing support for pwMS regarding PA and employ­
ment. We pose the following research question: "How do pwMS 
with mild to moderate disability perceive the meaning and fea­
sibility of engaging in physical activity while being employed?"
Materials and methods
Design
A qualitative design was chosen to address the research ques­
tion using individual, semi-structured, in-depth interviews that 
were analysed in a phenomenological hermeneutic framework 
in the interpretative tradition. This design and method allowed 
us to obtain insights into the first-hand experiences of the 
participants, and derive new knowledge based on the signifi­
cance of human experience, reflection and action [27,28].
Context of the study
The study was nested within a two-armed pilot feasibility 
randomised controlled trial (RCT) (N = 29), which explored a 
new complex intervention, CoreDISTparticipation, compared 
to usual care [29]. This intervention linked healthcare levels 
and sectors and aimed to optimise sensorimotor function, PA 
and employment. It was administered for 10 weeks and is 
described in Table 1.
Sample
Based on recruitment from the MS-OP clinic at the Nordland 
Hospital Thrust (NHT) and written informed consent, all 29 
pwMS who participated in the pilot RCT (intervention n = 15, 
controls n = 14) were invited to participate in the present 
study. This approach ensured the use of rich material to 
detect a variety of perceptions that were both dependent 
and independent of participation in the new intervention. 
The inclusion criteria were as follows: (1) diagnosed with MS 
in accordance with the McDonald criteria [30]; (2) Expanded 
Disability Status Scale (EDSS) [31] ≤ 3.5 (obtained from the 
participants' medical journals at NHT); (3) ≥ 18 years; (4) 
employed (10-100% full-time equivalent); and (5) registered 
at the MS-OP clinic at NHT. Individuals who were (1) preg­
nant or retired at enrolment, (2) experienced exacerbation 
within two weeks prior to enrolment or (3) had other serious 
conditions compromising balance, walking or work capacity 
were excluded. Three participants from the control group 
refused to be interviewed due to a busy schedule. The 
remaining 26 participants included 20 females and 6 males, 
15 of whom were in the intervention group and 11 of whom 
were in the control group, with a mean EDSS score of 1.73 
(range 0-3.5) and a mean age of 48.5 years (range 31-66). 
Participant characteristics are presented in Table 2.
Table 1.  Descriptions of CoreDISTparticipation [29].
CoreDISTparticipation
Consists of three interlinked phases (a-b-c):
a) MS outpatient (MS-OP) clinic (in addition to regular consultations)
Day 1
•	
A digital consultation with the MS nurse 
(20 min) addressing work-related issues to 
promote participation in employment. A 
structured guide was used with the 
following themes: knowledge of MS in the 
workplace, work-related challenges 
experienced due to MS, potential needs and 
facilitators.
•	
A physiotherapy session (60 min) exploring 
the potential for changes in balance and 
walking with the aim of focusing on 
possibilities and motivating the participant.
b) Municipality
Weeks 2-5
•	
A physiotherapy physical assessment 
(60-90 min) continuing the exploration of 
the patient's impairments and potential for 
improvements.
•	
A digital meeting (20 min) with the patient, 
physiotherapist, MS nurse and employer to 
set goals for and discuss potential needs for 
adaptations regarding work and physical 
activity.
•	
Physiotherapist-driven outdoor sessions for 
four weeks conducting 
GroupCoreDISTexercisesa in groups of 3-5 
participants, 60 min x 2/week, addressing 
prerequisites for balance and walking.
•	
The participants were encouraged to be 
physically active and to conduct CoreDIST 
exercises at home. They had access to 
training videos on an open website.
c) Municipality
Weeks 7-10
•	
Physiotherapist-driven outdoor sessions in 
groups of 3-10, 60 min x 2/per week for five 
weeks addressing prerequisites for balance 
through GroupCoreDIST exercises and 
high-intensity walking or running.
•	
The participants were encouraged to 
continue the dialog with their employer.
•	
The participants were encouraged to be 
physically active and to conduct CoreDIST 
exercises at home. Reminders and 
encouragement for conducting CoreDIST 
exercises from training videos were sent to 
the participants' smartphones after each 
outdoor session.
In addition, physical measurements, activity measurements with activity 
monitors and a questionnaire were conducted.
The control group received a physiotherapy consultation at the MS-OP 
clinic followed by usual care in the municipality. Both groups followed 
regular consultations and medications.
aGroupCoreDIST: Group-based training focusing on core (trunk) activation com­
bined with DISTal functional movement; D = dual task, dose (high), I = individu­
alised, insights, S = stability, somatosensory stimulation, selective movements, 
T = teaching, training.

European Journal of Physiotherapy
221
Data collection
The first author conducted all interviews between November 
2021 and June 2022. Participants from the intervention 
group were interviewed within two months after the pilot 
RCT, to capture recent experiences. The control group partic­
ipants, unaffected by the new intervention, were interviewed 
seven months after the pilot RCT. Theme-based interview 
guides with open-ended questions were developed and used 
in the interviews (supplementary material), informed by the 
relevant literatures on MS, PA, work, and methodology, and 
the researchers' experiences. The interview guides focused 
on experiences with and reflections on perceived barriers 
and facilitators for employment, experiences with work-related 
follow-up, exercise and physical activity, perceived health, 
the work situation, and thoughts about future employment. 
A pilot interview was conducted that led to adjustments of 
the interview guide, particularly regarding its structure and 
length. All positive, negative and neutral experiences were 
requested during the interviews. Follow‐up questions and 
rephrasing of the participants' responses were conducted to 
ensure communicative validation [32]. The interviews were 
audio-recorded and conducted face-to-face in an undis­
turbed office (at NHT, at Nord University or at the partici­
pants' workplace), except for one interview that was 
conducted digitally at the participant's request. The inter­
views lasted between 51 and 97 min for a total of 30 h and 
39 min of audio recordings and 556 pages of transcription. 
Field notes and debriefings with the participants were com­
pleted after each interview.
Analysis
The first author and an assistant not involved in the study 
transcribed the data verbatim. Systematic text condensation 
was used for the analyses [33]. This cross-case analysis is 
pragmatic because it is not restricted to one specific theoret­
ical perspective; however, it encourages abstraction by apply­
ing theory [33]. The analysis was systematic and involved an 
iterative and dynamic process of decontextualising and 
recontextualizing the material to search for the essence of 
the phenomenon [33].
The following four steps were used. (1) Total impres­
sion: MGH and ECA read all the interviews and BN read a 
considerable portion to obtain an overall impression of the 
material. Additionally, the fieldnotes were included and 
reviewed. Based on the first 16 interviews, we agreed on six 
preliminary themes (starting points for organising the data) 
that could answer the research question. The last 10 
interviews contributed with additional meaning units that 
were included in the existing themes but did not introduce 
new themes. Thus, we concluded that the sample and data 
were adequate [33]. (2) Identification and sorting of 
meaning units: MGH identified the meaning units (text 
fragments containing information about the research ques­
tion) based on the preliminary themes and categorised 
them into code groups and subgroups [33] using NVivo 
software by QSR International, version 13. The interpretation 
and organisation of meaning units and code groups were 
discussed with ECA and BN. The names and organisation of 
the code groups changed during the process to enhance 
accuracy as the analysis and text developed [33]. (3) 
Condensation: The content of each code group was 
abstracted, and a condensate (a short summary in the first 
person) was written for each code group by MGH and dis­
cussed with ECA [33]. (4) Synthesis: The decontextualised 
condensates were recontextualized into analytic texts (texts 
in third person, presenting the most prominent content and 
meaning about the phenomenon in the material), including 
quotes that illustrated the findings [33]. Based on the con­
tent, categories were developed that served as subheadings 
in the presentation of the results [33]. The interpretations in 
each step, analytic texts and manuscript were discussed in 
workshops, adjusted and critically reviewed by all the 
authors and compared to the full transcripts for validation 
to ensure that the findings reflected the original context 
[33]. The preliminary themes, final code groups and sub­
groups, examples of meaning units, and final categories are 
presented in Table 3.
To deepen our understanding of the participants' percep­
tions, the interpretations were informed by the pattern the­
ory of self (PTS) [22], which guided the analysis towards 
self-related aspects and meaning.
The PTS elaborates 10 distinguishing features of the 
embodied self-pattern and claims that our sense of self and 
personal identity, is formed by a complex dynamical interplay 
of these various processes (Table 4) [21]. These processes are 
interwoven and constantly evolving such that a change in 
one process influences the others. To deepen our understand­
ing of the experiences of pwMS related to perceptions of the 
meaning and feasibility of PA while being employed, we 
focused on the following processes in the PTS. The bodily and 
prereflective experiential processes include core bio-systemic 
and autopoietic elements as well as prereflective self-awareness 
and involve concepts such as sense of ownership and sense 
of agency. These concepts reflect the experience of mine-ness 
(it is my body moving) and the sense of control (I am the one 
causing or generating movements) [34], in which propriocep­
tion, kinaesthesia, and tactile and visual signals are essential 
[21]. These processes are especially relevant for pwMS due to 
changes in sensory-motor modalities and their importance in 
relation to PA. Additionally, affective processes are important 
due to the high incidence and impact of fatigue among 
pwMS. Bodily and affective factors are also connected to the 
behavioural/action processes of the self. Behaviours, actions, 
and skills reflect what an individual can or cannot do, shaping 
and constituting an individual's identity and character [22]. 
This is directly relevant for pwMS due to their reduced 
Table 2.  Participant characteristics.
PwMS (n = 26)
Intervention-group, n
15
Control-group, n
11
Sex (male/female), n (%)
6 male/20 female (23%/77%)
Age at intervention, mean (SD) range
48,5 (8,36) 31-66
RRMS, n
25
PPMS, n
1
EDSS, mean (SD) range
1.73 (0.99) 0-3.5

222
M. GRYTVIK HARTVEDT ET AL.
participation in PA and work. PA and employment are also 
connected to the social/intersubjective and normative processes 
within the self-pattern, which may involve the sense of being 
part of a group with defined roles, actions, obligations, and 
expectations and the self-conception of who we are and who 
we think we should be [21]. The workplace environment, 
Table 3.  Overview of the preliminary themes, final code groups and subgroups, examples of meaning units, and final categories in the analytic process.
Systematic, iterative and dynamic process of decontextualising and recontextualizing
Preliminary themes
Code-groups
Subgroups
Meaning unit (examples)
Final categories
Physical activity and 
function
The meaning 
of various 
PA for 
work
PA in general
I feel that I get more energy from it (jogging) (...) I also get a good 
conscience from having done it. In a way, I feel a bit more alert and 
stronger. I guess that makes me feel more alert and more satisfied with 
myself (at work).
Meaningfulness 
of PA for 
work
Balancing daily 
life, PA and 
work when 
energy is low
Leisure PA within 
work hours is 
beneficial but 
challenging 
to implement
Sensorimotor- and core 
exercises in the 
intervention(CoreDIST)
Before the project, I had to walk against the wall (at work) and just hold 
my hand against it to get my focus straight ahead. (...) I do not need 
to use this support and do not have the dizziness I had before the 
project.
Symptoms and 
challenges
Meaning of work
Symptoms, 
challenges 
and 
priorities
Physical
One of my feet has been more difficult to walk with (...) I always complain 
that it's heavy on the stairs. I've stopped complaining about it, and 
that's because I perceive that I walk differently.
Cognitive, mental, and 
psychosocial
Having some fitness and being able to endure a working day. It's not just about 
physical fitness but also about mental fitness, being in good shape.
Tiredness, fatigue, and 
priorities in daily life
It's this thing about having enough energy and mental capacity to get 
through the day with a full job, training and family. I don't know if I'll 
be able to manage it mentally.
Adjustments, 
accommodations 
and facilitators
Relation, 
communication 
and expectations
Health- and welfare 
system/structure
Framework for 
PA within 
work
Relation, communication 
and expectations line 
manager
It's this confirmation that you can do it. If he says something about it, I 
think that yes, I'm allowed to do that, I can actually go and exercise 
during working hours.
Relations, communication 
and expectations of 
colleagues
I can't just go and do some exercises and take a break when things are 
hectic (...) it wouldn't be a good feeling. I know that they (colleagues) 
might be struggling, and then I'm supposed to. It's not possible.
Rules, rights and 
regulations
I also know that, strictly speaking, you have the right to have time off to 
participate in this kind of thing (the intervention). But I haven't 
demanded that, so I've gone to work and I've taken this as part of my 
free time.
Flexibility and autonomy 
to choose
I've actually been allowed to organise it a bit like I wanted to (exercise), as long 
as it doesn't interfere too much with the work I'm supposed to be doing.
Table 4.  Elements of the self-pattern, from Gallagher's pattern theory of self [21].
Elements of the 
pattern
Brief description
Bodily processes
Includes core bio-systemic and autopoietic processes related to motoric, autonomic, endocrine, enteric, immune, interoceptive functions, 
allowing the overall system to maintain homeostasis necessary for survival, and to distinguish between itself and what is not itself.
Prereflective 
experiential 
processes
Includes prereflective self-awareness, a structural feature of first-person consciousness constrained by bodily factors; the sense of 
ownership (mineness) and the sense of agency, which can involve various sensory-motor modalities, such as proprioception, 
kinaesthesia, touch and vision. These aspects form the experiential core of what is sometimes called the minimal self.
Affective 
processes
The fact that someone manifests a certain temperament or emotional disposition reflects a particular mix of affective factors that range 
from very basic and mostly covert or tacit bodily affects (e.g. hunger, fatigue, libido) to what may be a typical emotion pattern, a set 
of existential feelings, a background mood.
Behavioural/action 
processes
Behaviours and actions make us who we are - behavioural habits and skills reflect, and perhaps actually constitute, our character. This is 
a classic view that goes back at least to Aristotle.
Social/
intersubjective 
processes
Humans (possibly some non-human animals) are born with a capacity for attuning to intersubjective existence; at a certain point in 
social relations a more developed self-conscious recognition of oneself as being distinct from others, a sense of self-for-others, and a 
sense of being part of a group or community.
Cognitive/
psychological 
processes
These are aspects emphasised in traditional theories of personal identity highlighting psychological continuity and memory, including 
one's conceptual understanding of oneself, beliefs, cognitive dispositions, as well as personality traits.
Reflective 
processes
The ability to reflect on one's experiences and actions - closely related to notions of autonomy and moral personhood, including the 
capacity to reflectively evaluate and form second-order volitions about one's desires.
Narrative 
processes
Self-interpretation has a narrative structure and recursively reflects (and often reinforces) the self-pattern. On some theories, selves are 
inherently or constitutively narrative entities.
Ecological 
processes
We tend to identify ourselves with our stuff - physical pieces of property, clothes, homes, and various things that we own, the technologies we use, 
the institutions we work in, etc. Our embodied-situated actions engage with (and sometimes incorporate) artefacts, instruments, bits and structures 
of the environment in ways that define us and scaffold our identities. Situations shape who we are, and affordances define our possibilities.
Normative 
processes
Our extensive engagement with the environment includes social and cultural practices. These are not just what we do, but involve what 
we ought to do, and obligations that we keep or not. Constraints (and sometimes well-defined roles) imposed by social, cultural, 
institutional factors shape our habitual behaviours, and our self-conceptions of who we are, and who we think we should be.

European Journal of Physiotherapy
223
along with tools, instruments and technologies with which we 
work, also influence identity in connection with the ecological 
processes in the self-pattern [21]. In this respect, the claim is 
that embodied-situated actions engage with structures of the 
environment in ways that define us and scaffold our identities 
[21]. Thus, both being employed, and the elements related to 
the workplace are relevant to the self.
This phenomenologically based theory provided the 
analysis with an extended conception of bodily dysfunc­
tions and experiences, incorporating concepts of embod­
ied cognition, drawn from embodied cognition approaches, 
in which physical experiences, bodily sensations and phys­
ical capabilities influence self-concept. Thus, PTS contrib­
uted to the analysis to uncover new insights regarding PA 
and employment.
Research team and reflexivity
The first, second and last authors are physiotherapists. MGH 
(female) has a background in secondary health care, sports, life­
style change and occupational health. ECA (female) and BN 
(female) are clinical specialists in neurological physiotherapy with 
backgrounds in primary and secondary health care and research. 
SG (male) is a philosopher and an expert in phenomenology. 
ECA and BN developed the CoreDISTparticipation, where ECA 
participated as a physiotherapist and BN was the project leader. 
MGH and SG had no previous relationships with the participants. 
Prior to the interviews, the participants were told that the inter­
viewer (MGH) is a PhD student who sought to explore their 
experiences with work-related barriers, facilitators, the interven­
tion and regular follow-up.
The authors' backgrounds, experiences, knowledge and 
interests influenced preconceptions in all phases of the 
research process [35]. To ensure quality and trustworthiness, 
we continuously tried to be aware of our preconceptions and 
discussed our established assumptions. The preliminary find­
ings and interpretations were also discussed with other exter­
nal researchers. Three user representatives contributed views 
on the aim and feasibility of the study in the early phase and 
later through discussions of the findings. The specificity and 
variety of the authors' insights and perspectives facilitated 
deep, relevant and multiple interpretations based on both 
closeness and distance [36].
Ethical considerations
The study was conducted in accordance with the 
Declaration of Helsinki and the Vancouver recommenda­
tions and approved by the Regional Committees for 
Medical and Health Research Ethics in North Norway (REK 
North: 174837) and ethical authorities at Nordland Hospital 
Thrust. Written confirmed consent to participate was 
obtained from all participants and confirmed verbally prior 
to the interviews. Privacy and personal data were main­
tained according to all relevant rules and regulations and 
handled with care and respect. To improve the reporting 
of the study, we used the Consolidated Criteria for 
Reporting Qualitative Research (COREQ) [37].
Results
Based on the analyses, three categories were developed: 
"Meaningfulness of physical activity for work", "Balancing 
daily life, physical activity and work when energy is low", and 
"Leisure physical activity during work hours is beneficial but 
challenging to implement". The findings are presented as 
analytic texts condensed from the interviews and supported 
by relevant quotations from the participants.
Meaningfulness of physical activity for work
A major theme in the data was that leisure-time PA (e.g. hik­
ing, running, yoga, soccer, strength training, sensorimotor 
and core exercises) was perceived to improve or sustain work 
capacity, performance, satisfaction, and retention. This was 
highlighted as significant for identity, self-esteem and quality 
of life. Some participants stated that job retention was their 
main reason for being physically active, while others focused 
on health, well-being, and reducing the deterioration of 
MS-related symptoms. Maintaining good health reduced 
future concerns and instead allowed them to see themselves 
as maintaining or increasing their ability to work. One partic­
ipant stated,
I do believe that it helps you stay employed, the fact that you 
have the opportunity to recover and gain energy from exercise. 
(...) It's not just about the physical aspect, but it also has an 
impact on the mental aspect (...) So, I do think that if I hadn't 
been exercising, I wouldn't have been working either. (Sue, EDSS 
3, intervention group)
A variety of physical and mental benefits of PA were 
described as impacting work and employment. Improved 
physical capacity and function, bodily awareness, knowledge, 
and feelings of mastery were perceived by participants with 
physically demanding jobs. These perceived improvements 
were perceived to directly enhance the performance of work 
tasks, such as walking, heavy lifting, carrying, and static work. 
When conducting these work tasks, the participants described 
a feeling of better contact with the floor, balance, less dizzi­
ness, a feeling of correct performance, and the sense that the 
work tasks were less tiring. Some said it led to greater satis­
faction and feelings of control, less frustration, and more 
energy during the day, both at work and during their spare 
time. Others described improved self-esteem, self-efficacy 
and confidence in managing their job due to a sense of mas­
tery of physical and mental challenges. A few of the partici­
pants stated that having a physically active job facilitated job 
retention, while others changed to a more sedentary job 
because the physical demands were too high. A common 
notion among the participants with sedentary work, such as 
computer-related tasks, was that the physical and mental 
benefits of PA influenced their work by increasing their toler­
ance and strength to handle mental challenges and stress as 
well as their capacity to endure a working day, leading to job 
retention.
A central finding was that regardless of the type of work, 
PA was perceived to counteract fatigue, increase energy lev­
els, and enhance mood, well-being and satisfaction with 

224
M. GRYTVIK HARTVEDT ET AL.
oneself. These effects were perceived as beneficial for work 
performance, -satisfaction, and -retention due to increased 
motivation, initiative, inspiration, satisfaction, and vigour at 
work. In contrast, some participants experienced PA being 
energy-consuming and limiting. Several of the participants 
had experienced limitations in PA or the inability to perform 
PA they had previously mastered. Some described engaging 
in PA as part of their identity and noted that the limitations 
they experienced led to a sense of dissatisfaction with them­
selves and a feeling of loss or defeat, which also affected 
work. One participant stated,
I was in very good shape. The most fun thing I know is to go 
from mountaintop to mountaintop. It was like, suddenly you lose 
all that. You don't want to be sick, you just want to be healthy. 
(Lily, EDSS 0, control group)
Some participants described fighting against the illness and 
the reduced abilities and seeking a sense of normalcy and con­
trol through mastering PA. For instance, one participant stated,
I decided, darn it, this isn't going to take me. So I forced myself 
up to the mountaintop holding onto the trees and thought, I'm 
going up! So it's a bit about the notion that this isn't going to 
take me. (Emma, EDSS 1, control group)
Balancing daily life, physical activity and work when 
energy is low
A major characteristic in the data was the challenge of bal­
ancing daily life, leisure-time PA, and work. The participants 
noted that due to limited energy, capacity and time, they 
had to allocate and prioritise these aspects wisely. For 
instance, too much work left less time and energy for PA and 
vice versa. One of the participants described it as follows:
It's this thing about having enough energy and capacity in your 
head to get through the day with a full job, training and family. I 
don't know if I'll be able to manage it mentally. (Ava, EDSS 2, 
intervention group)
The participants described varying priorities regarding bal­
ancing work, rest, PA, and other activities. While most 
acknowledged the importance of employment, they also 
desired lives that encompassed more than work and rest. 
Some managed this balance by prioritising PA over full-time 
work, recognising its positive impact on quality of life, health, 
and employment in both the short and long term. For 
instance, a participant expressed this as follows:
I believe that at one point, it (exercise) might enhance my work 
capacity, but at another point, I might need a lower degree of 
employment to have the capacity to do that exercise. (...) I 
believe that you can have a longer career if you maybe reduce a 
bit, work fewer hours during the day, so you have the opportu­
nity to exercise in addition. (Susan, EDSS 1, intervention group)
In contrast, a few participants prioritised using all their 
energy at work, leaving no energy for exercise or other activ­
ities. However, several of the participants had previously 
experienced that when they curtailed all activities other than 
work due to the need for rest, this led to sick leave or dis­
ability pensions.
Some participants stated that they managed to engage in 
PA, such as caregiving and household responsibilities or 
leisure-time PA, in addition to work due to accommodations 
at work. For instance, adjustments such as reducing physi­
cally demanding work tasks or having flexibility to dynami­
cally adjust their work hours, work places, physical work tasks 
and breaks according to their current needs to avoid overrid­
ing total capacity.
Leisure physical activity during work hours is beneficial 
but challenging to implement
Most participants believed that an arrangement that allowed 
for the practice of leisure-time PA during work hours was 
beneficial for employment, especially when energy or leisure 
time was limited. However, only a few of the participants 
reported having this kind of arrangement. A central feature 
among those who had this arrangement was that they found 
it challenging to put into practice. Most participants noted 
that despite having good relationships with their line man­
ager, the topic of PA during work hours was not raised by 
themselves or their managers. A common reason for not 
addressing or practicing PA was a reluctance to focus on 
their illness or limitations, to stand out with special privi­
leges, to feel pity from others, or to be a burden. One partic­
ipant explained:
You feel like you're not very eager to talk about sickness. You 
have a greater need to discuss things other than sickness because 
talking about sickness doesn't make me any healthier (...) There's 
something about when you're at work, you want to be in that 
role, right? You want to function, you want to be part of some­
thing, and not weak. (Mia, EDSS 0, intervention group)
Other participants stated that they refrained from 
addressing PA during work hours because they were con­
tent with their current work adjustments and level of PA or 
were unaware that such an arrangement was an option. 
Others believed it was not feasible due to work features or 
organisational elements. In particular, those who worked 
part time or had a large amount of work said that they felt 
obligated to work instead of practicing PA during work 
hours. The participants said that leaving work to perform PA 
led to less time for the work needed to be done and a 
sense of guilt, especially when it resulted in an extra work­
load for their colleagues. A participant with a large work­
load stated:
I find it difficult to use my free time (for training). I don't have the 
capacity. So maybe more of it can be done during working hours. 
But then it has to be possible to achieve, right? There must be 
space for it. But the fact that I could use my working hours for 
more training, that might be something that could have been 
accommodated. (Ben, EDSS 2, control group)
A common notion was that openness regarding the diag­
nosis led to better understanding and acceptance from line 
managers and colleagues, which, in several cases, were expe­
rienced to facilitate the practice of PA during work hours. The 
line manager's understanding, confirmation, reminders and 
encouragement to perform PA during work hours were 

European Journal of Physiotherapy
225
central to the participants' feeling that the activity was 
acceptable. One participant expressed this as follows:
It's about the confirmation that you can do it. If he (the line man­
ager) mentions it, I think to myself, yes, I'm allowed to, I can actu­
ally go and exercise during work hours (...) It's a bit easier to take 
action and just say, now I'm going for a walk. I don't need to be 
present for the next half hour. I can actually go and exercise in 
some way without it being a big deal. (Grace, EDSS 2, interven­
tion group)
Flexibility was emphasised as a facilitator of PA by most of 
the participants. The possibility of customising the timing 
and location of the activity based on the work schedule and 
current state of being, by for instance flexible working hours, 
was highlighted. The participants described that this flexibil­
ity led to PA being more feasible due to less stress, fatigue, 
and interference with work compared to fixed sessions. 
However, a few participants favoured PA at fixed times.
Discussion
The main findings of this study are: (1) PA and its bodily impacts 
were perceived to be meaningful for health, function, life bal­
ance, identity, and employment, influencing how individuals see 
themselves and their perceived abilities, possibilities and chal­
lenges in relation to work. (2) Balancing work, PA, and daily life 
was experienced as challenging due to limited energy and/or 
time, and individual priorities were set to achieve this balance. 
Managing the work-life balance was perceived to be beneficial 
for both employment and the feasibility of PA, often achieved 
by work adjustments. (3) An arrangement to implement leisure 
PA during working hours was recognised as a positive work 
accommodation when there was acceptance of and dialog 
about the arrangement with the line manager and colleagues. 
However, requesting and utilising such an arrangement was 
challenging due to social and normative practices, as well as 
organisational structures and characteristics.
These findings highlight that PA can be perceived as 
meaningful for work, influencing self-perception, including 
perceived work capabilities. However, the feasibility of PA is 
often influenced by individual, environmental, and/or social 
aspects. Thus, the meaning and feasibility of PA while 
employed appear to be complex constructs, demonstrating 
the need for an extended framework to deepen our under­
standing of the findings.
Physical activity strengthens self-perception and 
identity, which are important for employment
The findings of improved or maintained physical and mental 
capacities, functions, and health are consistent with previous 
research [10,12,38]. Additionally, studies have demonstrated 
that PA and bodily awareness are perceived as beneficial by 
pwMS for identity and self-concept [14,17,39] and can 
improve activity and participation [12,14]. The current study 
extends prior knowledge by highlighting that PA and the 
abovementioned improvements influenced the participants' 
self-concept as employees and were perceived as beneficial 
for employment. The findings of bodily improvements 
indicate a change in sensory-motor modalities, the sense of 
ownership, and the sense of agency, which are aspects 
included in the self-pattern [21] and, thus, have implications 
for the embodied self [40]. Such improvements can influence 
an individual's thoughts and feelings regarding themselves 
and their affordances [40], for instance, regarding employ­
ment. It can also enhance intentionality, an outward directed­
ness [41], and engagement in actions and interactions with 
others or the world [40]. Thus, as underscored by the partic­
ipants' experiences, the study suggests that PA can be a 
means of strengthening one's sense of ownership, sense of 
agency, self-identity and perception of possibility and ability 
to handle work situations, ultimately facilitating employment.
The findings of improved energy and mood leading to 
increased abilities and capacities to handle work, align with 
previous research showing that PA reduces fatigue in pwMS 
[11] and that reducing fatigue improves work-related abilities 
and increases work hours [42]. Fatigue is the most common 
reason for unemployment and reduced work productivity in 
pwMS [4,43] and has been documented as resulting in lower 
self-esteem in pwMS [44]. According to the PTS, both fatigue 
and mood are affective processes of the self-pattern [21]. 
Thus, it is likely that improving energy levels and mood 
through PA beneficially influences individuals' sense of identity 
and self-esteem, resulting in the reported benefits in working 
contexts. The feeling of ability rather than disability seemed to 
reinforce positive beliefs about oneself, self-efficacy, and 
self-identity as normal, healthy, strong, and capable, which 
aligns with previous studies [17,18,45,46]. Self-efficacy can 
lead to extended participation in work [19,20] and can extend 
to other contexts of everyday life for pwMS [18,47]. Thus, the 
present study suggests that both enhanced self-efficacy and 
the constituted identity from engaging in PA may extend into 
work contexts, leading to benefits for employment. Practicing 
PA and gaining increased abilities can be understood in rela­
tion to the behavioural/action processes in the self-pattern, 
which encompass behaviours, actions and the development 
of habits and skills. Behaviours and actions make us who we 
are; together with habit formation and skills, they reflect and 
constitute individuals' character and affect individuals' possibil­
ities [21]. Improving action processes and enhancing skills by 
performing PA strengthen the sense of agency and the char­
acter and identity of being a capable employee, creating pos­
sibilities for rather than barriers to employment.
In contrast, some individuals felt that PA reminded them 
of their disability because of their bodily limitations, which 
led to a sense of loss and dissatisfaction. According to the 
PTS, these feelings could lead to less PA and the loss of skills 
and abilities as well as further modulation of one's self-pattern 
affecting one's sense of agency [22]. Thus, for these individu­
als, PA may reinforce a character and identity that they do 
not recognise as their pre-MS selves, causing uncertainty and 
leading to adverse possibilities for further PA and employment.
The finding that PA can be a means to resist or control 
disabilities and MS and to maintain health and physical func­
tion aligns with previous studies [10,16,17,46]. However, our 
study showed that PA was often motivated by job retention. 
In relation to the ecological processes of the self-pattern, a 
job can be an important element of self-concept and can 

226
M. GRYTVIK HARTVEDT ET AL.
scaffold identity because people tend to identify with the 
institutions in which they work [21]. This insight demon­
strates that PA is related to a meaningful structure in life and 
has substantial meaning for self-identity, especially for PwMS 
who intend to maintain or return to work.
Life balance and the individual's context matter for the 
meaning and feasibility of physical activity
The findings revealed that the work-life balance was chal­
lenging and that the overall load was affected by both work 
and private life, impacting the capacity and time needed for 
engagement in PA and work. Previous studies have shown 
that the need to balance activity and fatigue often results in 
a reduction in PA in favour of work or other responsibilities 
[37,48] and the need to make adjustments in home roles [9]. 
However, due to the perceived improvement in capacity and 
energy from PA, it is likely that PA reduces the reported need 
to prioritise. On the other hand, prioritising PA often led to 
reduced employment to maintain balance. This prioritisation 
may be related to an increased need to prioritise one's own 
health, family, interests, and work-life balance, due to the 
diagnosis, as emphasised by Vijayasingham and colleagues 
[49]. These findings and perspectives underscore the signifi­
cance of considering aspects of individuals' private life, prior­
ities, overall load, and life balance in supporting PA and 
employment for pwMS.
Related to these findings, the PTS provides an understand­
ing of the connection between structures and practices 
related to life balance, the self-pattern and the feasibility of 
engaging in PA while employed. According to the PTS, situa­
tions and structures of the environment (connected to eco­
logical processes), including social and cultural practices 
(connected to social and normative processes), influence our 
self-conception of who we are, who we think we should be, 
and our actions [21]. Thus, we can understand the meaning 
and feasibility of PA in relation to context [50], where PA, as 
an engaged action, the environment, and the social-cultural 
context influence one another as factors of the self-pattern 
[21,50]. This perspective suggests that individuals are not iso­
lated entities; rather, they are inextricably woven into their 
environment. Embodied-situated actions and capabilities 
engage with the structures of the physical, social and cultural 
environment [22,50,51] in ways that can enhance or limit 
affordances and possibilities for action [50]. Thus, an individ­
ual's perception of the meaning and feasibility of PA are intri­
cately linked to affordances and ecological- and social 
contexts, ultimately impacting engagement in PA and 
employment. Understanding this interplay provides opportu­
nities to implement appropriate and individualised accom­
modations for PA and work, which may be beneficial for 
pwMS' self-perception, health, and employment.
Leisure physical activity during work hours may be a 
beneficial arrangement but is challenging to implement
The findings indicate that an arrangement of integrating lei­
sure PA into working hours can be a beneficial work 
accommodation for pwMS, contributing to a holistic approach 
to life balance. It may facilitate PA without exceeding overall 
capacity or forcing a choice between PA and work. The 
arrangement also has low cost, which has been found to be 
the chief reason for the success of accommodation requests 
[52]. Having the opportunity to practice PA without compro­
mising employment or chores in daily life may stimulate the 
feeling of mastery of life balance. In light of the PTS, this may 
enhance one's sense of agency meaningful for a person's 
self-concept and identity as an employee, resulting in bene­
fits for health, employment and quality of life.
The findings indicate that implementing such arrange­
ment is challenging due to organisational structures, charac­
teristics, and intersubjective aspects. Furthermore, dialog 
between line managers, employees, and colleagues is import­
ant for the feasibility of the arrangement. Previous research 
has reported that pwMS avoid requesting work accommoda­
tions due to concerns about consequences as well as a lack 
of self-confidence and self-efficacy [47,53-55] and that inter­
actions with employers and colleagues influence the willing­
ness to request accommodations at work [47]. Communication 
between employers and employees can lead to a better 
understanding and more effective accommodations in the 
workplace [43], and health professionals should support such 
communication [53,56]. Based on the findings of improved 
self-efficacy, self-esteem, and self-concept from PA, we sug­
gest that PA can contribute to stimulating communication 
regarding needs and work accommodations, resulting in 
increased feasibility of leisure-time PA during work hours and 
employment.
The influence of the intersubjective aspects on the mean­
ing and feasibility of PA can be understood in light of the 
normative 
and 
social/intersubjective 
processes 
of 
the 
self-pattern [21]. These processes are influenced by norms 
and social, cultural and institutional practices, which influ­
ence individual actions and self-conception as we work in 
contexts of interaction [21,50,51]. It is not only actions but 
also social interactions that make us who we are, suggesting 
the importance of intersubjective aspects (e.g. how others 
might perceive me) in the workplace for the perceived feasi­
bility of PA. The present study confirms that the normative 
and social aspects of the workplace influence the meaning 
and feasibility of PA. Thus, it is important to reduce con­
straints imposed by social and cultural aspects in the work­
place through dialog between employees, employers and 
colleagues. Creating the best possible conditions for PA is of 
interest not only to individuals with MS but also to employ­
ers and society since it can benefit job capacity, productivity, 
and retention.
In summary, PA can be meaningful for employment 
aspects among employed pwMS, influencing self-perception 
through bodily experiences which in turn may affect per­
ceived capabilities and opportunities for work. However, the 
feasibility of PA may be constrained by challenges related to 
work-life balance, the allocation of limited energy, physical 
disabilities, and work structures and environments, including 
social and normative practices. The limited feasibility of PA 
may have adverse influences on self-perception. Implementing 
individualised, reasonable work adjustments to facilitate PA 

European Journal of Physiotherapy
227
may help reduce constraints and increase its feasibility. This 
could include accommodating leisure PA during work hours 
and enhancing support and dialog between employers, 
employees and colleagues. Ultimately, this approach could 
facilitate both PA and employment for pwMS.
Strengths and limitations
One strength of this study is its holistic and phenomenolog­
ical approach, which challenges the traditional Cartesian per­
spective of separating the body and mind and the individual 
and social context. The study integrates these aspects and 
emphasises their interrelatedness. Another strength is the use 
of first-person experiences from pwMS, which are a valuable 
source for developing health services and self-management 
strategies. Furthermore, the study benefits from including 
participants from both intervention and control groups and 
the application of the PTS, which enriches the findings and 
enhances their theoretical generalisability and transferability.
However, several aspects of the study need to be consid­
ered. First, individuals who agreed to participate may have had 
inherently positive attitudes towards PA and employment. In 
addition, participating in the intervention may have increased 
awareness and perception of the benefits of PA, especially in 
relation to employment. However, this concern is mitigated by 
efforts to capture a range of positive, negative and neutral 
experiences and by the inclusion of controls who were not 
exposed to the intervention. Second, the authors' roles, preun­
derstandings, preconceptions, and theoretical frames of refer­
ence may have influenced the conduct and interpretations of 
the study. However, the quality and trustworthiness of the 
study are maintained by the transparency and openness of the 
research process, the continuous identification and discussion 
of the authors' preconceptions, the involvement of external 
researchers and user representatives, and diverse authorship, 
which offers a variety of insights and perspectives [36]. Third, 
the findings may have limited transferability to individuals who 
are severely affected by MS and to non-Scandinavian health 
care and social and welfare systems. However, transferability to 
other conditions where fatigue and physical and cognitive dif­
ficulties are relevant seems reasonable.
Implications
The knowledge from this study can contribute to a deeper 
understanding of the importance of emphasising PA, dialog 
about PA in the workplace, and considering work-life balance, 
in facilitating PA and employment. Thus, it should be of inter­
est to pwMS, employers, and health professionals, such as 
physiotherapists. Health professionals, occupational health 
services, or labour and welfare administration may encourage 
and support the communication of pwMS with employers 
regarding PA and contribute to reasonable, individualised 
solutions to increase the feasibility of engaging in PA, prefer­
ably at an early stage. More research is needed regarding 
work-related outcomes from PA for pwMS and the involve­
ment of health professionals in facilitating sustained PA com­
bined with employment for pwMS.
Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge the participants' time and sharing of 
their experiences. The authors also thank the user representatives of the 
MS Association and the Research Group for Health Promotion and 
Rehabilitation at Nord University for their contributions.
Author contributions
The study was designed by BN, ECA, and MGH. MGH conducted all the 
interviews, transcribed 16 interviews, and analysed the interviews in col­
laboration with ECA and BN, with contributions from SG. All authors 
played a part in the interpretation, discussion, and presentation of the 
findings. The initial manuscript was drafted by MGH, with additions, cor­
rections and improvements by ECA and BN, and revised by SG. All 
authors contributed to the article and approved the final version. 
Throughout the entire process, MGH was supervised by ECA and BN.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.
Funding
This study was funded by Nord University.
Data availability statement
The data are currently not available because the ethics committee has 
not provided permission to share the data. Requests for access to the 
dataset can be directed to maria.g.hartvedt@nord.no
ORCID
Britt Normann 
 http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1874-4318
Ellen Christin Arntzen 
 http://orcid.org/0000-0001-5396-4071
References
	 [1]	 Compston A, Coles A. Multiple sclerosis. Lancet. 2008;372(9648):1502-
1517. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(08)61620-7.
	 [2]	 Casey B, Coote S, Galvin R, et  al. Objective physical activity levels 
in people with multiple sclerosis: meta‐analysis. Scand J Med Sci 
Sports. 2018;28(9):1960-1969. doi: 10.1111/sms.13214.
	 [3]	 Salter A, Thomas N, Tyry T, et  al. Employment and absenteeism in 
working-age persons with multiple sclerosis. J Med Econ. 
2017;20(5):493-502. doi: 10.1080/13696998.2016.1277229.
	 [4]	 Kobelt G, Thompson A, Berg J, et  al. New insights into the burden 
and costs of multiple sclerosis in Europe. Mult Scler. 2017;23(8):1123-
1136. doi: 10.1177/1352458517694432.
	 [5]	 García-Domínguez JM, Maurino J, Martínez-Ginés ML, et  al. 
Economic burden of multiple sclerosis in a population with low 
physical disability. BMC Public Health. 2019;19(1):609. doi: 10.1186/
s12889-019-6907-x.
	 [6]	 McCabe MP, De Judicibus M. The effects of economic disadvantage 
on psychological well-being and quality of life among people with 
multiple sclerosis. J Health Psychol. 2005;10(1):163-173. doi: 
10.1177/1359105305048562.
	 [7]	 Svendsen B, Grytten N, Bø L, et  al. The economic impact of multi­
ple sclerosis to the patients and their families in Norway. Eur J 
Health Econ. 2018;19(9):1243-1257. doi: 10.1007/s10198-018-0971-5.
	 [8]	 Streber R, Peters S, Pfeifer K. Systematic review of correlates and 
determinants of physical activity in persons with multiple sclerosis. 

228
M. GRYTVIK HARTVEDT ET AL.
Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2016;97(4):633-645.e29. doi: 10.1016/
j.apmr.2015.11.020.
	 [9]	 Johnson KL, Yorkston KM, Klasner ER, et  al. The cost and benefits 
of employment: a qualitative study of experiences of persons with 
multiple sclerosis. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2004;85(2):201-209. doi: 
10.1016/s0003-9993(03)00614-2.
	 [10]	 Learmonth YC, Motl RW. Physical activity and exercise training in 
multiple sclerosis: a review and content analysis of qualitative re­
search identifying perceived determinants and consequences. 
Disabil Rehabil. 2016;38(13):1227-1242. doi: 10.3109/09638288.
2015.1077397.
	 [11]	 Razazian N, Kazeminia M, Moayedi H, et  al. The impact of physical 
exercise on the fatigue symptoms in patients with multiple sclero­
sis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Neurol. 2020;20(1):
93. doi: 10.1186/s12883-020-01654-y.
	 [12]	 Amatya B, Khan F, Galea M. Rehabilitation for people with multiple 
sclerosis: an overview of Cochrane reviews. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev. 2019;1(1):CD012732. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD012732.
pub2.
	 [13]	 Gurpinar B, Kara B, Idiman E. Effects of aquatic exercises on pos­
tural control and hand function in multiple sclerosis: Halliwick ver­
sus aquatic plyometric exercises: a randomised trial. J Musculoskelet 
Neuronal Interact. 2020;20(2):249-255.
	 [14]	 Arntzen EC, Øberg GK, Gallagher S, et  al. Group-based, individual­
ized exercises can provide perceived bodily changes and strength­
en aspects of self in individuals with MS: a qualitative interview 
study. Physiother Theory Pract. 2021;37(10):1080-1095. doi: 10.
1080/09593985.2019.1683923.
	 [15]	 Pérez de Heredia-Torres M, Huertas-Hoyas E, Sánchez-Camarero C, 
et  al. Occupational performance in multiple sclerosis and its rela­
tionship with quality of life and fatigue. Eur J Phys Rehabil Med. 
2020;56(2):148-154. doi: 10.23736/s1973-9087.20.05914-6.
	 [16]	 Richardson EV, Barstow E, Motl RW. Exercise experiences among 
persons with multiple sclerosis living in the southeast of the 
United States. Disabil Rehabil. 2022;44(1):79-87. doi: 10.1080/
09638288.2020.1757767.
	 [17]	 Adamson BC, Adamson MD, Littlefield MM, et al. 'Move it or lose it': 
perceptions of the impact of physical activity on multiple sclerosis 
symptoms, relapse and disability identity. Qual Res Sport Exerc 
Health. 2018;10(4):457-475. doi: 10.1080/2159676X.2017.1415221.
	 [18]	 Motl RW, Snook EM. Physical activity, self-efficacy, and quality of 
life in multiple sclerosis. Ann Behav Med. 2008;35(1):111-115. doi: 
10.1007/s12160-007-9006-7.
	 [19]	 Doogan C, Playford ED. Supporting work for people with multiple 
sclerosis. Mult Scler. 2014;20(6):646-650. doi: 10.1177/13524585
14523499.
	 [20]	 Jongen PJ, Wesnes K, van Geel B, et al. Relationship between work­
ing hours and power of attention, memory, fatigue, depression 
and self-efficacy one year after diagnosis of clinically isolated syn­
drome and relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis. PLoS One. 
2014;9(5):e96444. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096444.
	 [21]	 Gallagher S. The self and its disorders. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press; 2024.
	 [22]	 Gallagher S. A pattern theory of self. Front Hum Neurosci. 
2013;7:443. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00443.
	 [23]	 Julian LJ, Vella L, Vollmer T, et al. Employment in multiple sclerosis: 
exiting and re-entering the work force. J Neurol. 2008;255(9):1354-
1360. doi: 10.1007/s00415-008-0910-y.
	 [24]	 Vitturi BK, Rahmani A, Dini G, et  al. Work barriers and job adjust­
ments of people with multiple sclerosis: a systematic review. J 
Occup 
Rehabil. 
2023;33(3):450-462. 
doi: 
10.1007/s10926-022-
10084-1.
	 [25]	 Caspersen CJ, Powell KE, Christenson GM. Physical activity, exercise, 
and physical fitness: definitions and distinctions for health-related 
research. Public Health Rep. 1985;100(2):126-131.
	 [26]	 Piggin J. What is physical activity? A holistic definition for teachers, 
researchers and policy makers. Front Sports Act Living. 2020;2:72. 
doi: 10.3389/fspor.2020.00072.
	 [27]	 Creswell J, Poth C. Qualitative inquiry and research design: choos­
ing among five approaches, 4th ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage 
Publications; 2017.
	 [28]	 Malterud K. Theory and interpretation in qualitative studies from 
general practice: why and how? Scand J Public Health. 2016;44(2):
120-129. doi: 10.1177/1403494815621181.
	 [29]	 Arntzen EC, Braaten T, Fikke HK, et al. Feasibility of a new interven­
tion addressing group-based balance and high-intensity training, 
physical activity and employment in individuals with multiple scle­
rosis: a pilot randomized controlled trial. Front Rehabil Sci. 
2023;4:1258737. doi: 10.3389/fresc.2023.1258737.
	 [30]	 Thompson AJ, Banwell BL, Barkhof F, et  al. Diagnosis of multiple 
sclerosis: 2017 revisions of the McDonald criteria. Lancet Neurol. 
2018;17(2):162-173. doi: 10.1016/s1474-4422(17)30470-2.
	 [31]	 Kurtzke JF. Rating neurologic impairment in multiple sclerosis: an 
expanded disability status scale (EDSS). Neurology. 1983;33(11):
1444-1452. doi: 10.1212/wnl.33.11.1444.
	 [32]	 Brinkmann S, Kvale S. InterViews: learning the craft of qualitative 
research interviewing, 3rd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; 2015.
	 [33]	 Malterud K. Systematic text condensation: a strategy for qualitative 
analysis. Scand J Public Health. 2012;40(8):795-805. doi: 10.1177/
1403494812465030.
	 [34]	 Gallagher S. Self and first-person perspective. In: Gallagher S, edi­
tor. Phenomenology. London: Palgrave Macmillan UK; 2012. p. 
122-158. doi: 10.1057/9781137283801_8.
	 [35]	 Cohen L, Manion L, Morrison K. Validity and reliability. In: Cohen L, 
Manion L, Morrison K, editors. Research Methods in Education, 8 
ed. London: Routledge; 2018. doi: 10.4324/9781315456539.
	 [36]	 Paulgaard G. Feltarbeid i egen kultur: innenfra, utenfra eller begge 
deler?[Fieldwork in thei own culture: from within, from outside or 
both?]. In: Wadel C, Fuglestad OL, Aase TH, Fossåskaret E, editors. 
Metodisk feltarbeid: produksjon og tolkning av kvalitative data. 
Oslo: Universitetsforl; 1997. p.70-93.
	 [37]	 Tong A, Sainsbury P, Craig J. Consolidated criteria for reporting 
qualitative research (COREQ): a 32-item checklist for interviews and 
focus groups. Int J Qual Health Care. 2007;19(6):349-357. doi: 
10.1093/intqhc/mzm042.
	 [38]	 Halabchi F, Alizadeh Z, Sahraian MA, et  al. Exercise prescription for pa­
tients with multiple sclerosis; potential benefits and practical recom­
mendations. BMC Neurol. 2017;17(1):185. doi: 10.1186/s12883-017-0960-9.
	 [39]	 Stennett A, De Souza L, Norris M. The meaning of exercise and 
physical activity in community dwelling people with multiple scle­
rosis. Disabil Rehabil. 2020;42(3):317-323. doi: 10.1080/09638288.
2018.1497715.
	 [40]	 Normann B. Body schema and body image disturbances in individ­
uals with multiple sclerosis. In: Ataria Y, Tanaka S, Gallagher S, ed­
itors. Body schema and body image. New directions: Oxford 
University Press; 2021.
	 [41]	 Merleau-Ponty M. Phenomenology of perception. London and New 
York: Routledge; 1962.
	 [42]	 Wickström A, Nyström J, Svenningsson A. Improved ability to work 
after one year of natalizumab treatment in multiple sclerosis. 
Analysis of disease-specific and work-related factors that influence 
the effect of treatment. Mult Scler. 2013;19(5):622-630. doi: 10.1177/
1352458512461391.
	 [43]	 Simmons RD, Tribe KL, McDonald EA. Living with multiple sclerosis: 
longitudinal changes in employment and the importance of symp­
tom management. J Neurol. 2010;257(6):926-936. doi: 10.1007/
s00415-009-5441-7.
	 [44]	 Fragoso YD, Silva EO, Finkelsztejn A. Correlation between fatigue and 
self-esteem in patients with multiple sclerosis. Arq Neuropsiquiatr. 
2009;67(3b):818-821. doi: 10.1590/s0004-282x2009000500007.

European Journal of Physiotherapy
229
	 [45]	 Kissow A-M. Participation in physical activity and the everyday life 
of people with physical disabilities: a review of the literature. 
Scandinavian Journal of Disability Research. 2015;17(2):144-166. 
doi: 10.1080/15017419.2013.787369.
	 [46]	 Dlugonski D, Joyce RJ, Motl RW. Meanings, motivations, and strat­
egies for engaging in physical activity among women with ­multiple 
sclerosis. Disabil Rehabil. 2012;34(25):2148-2157. doi: 10.3109/
09638288.2012.677935.
	 [47]	 Rumrill PD.Jr Challenges and opportunities related to the employ­
ment of people with multiple sclerosis. J Vocat Rehabil. 
2009;31(2):83-90. doi: 10.3233/JVR-2009-477.
	 [48]	 Kayes NM, McPherson KM, Taylor D, et  al. Facilitators and barriers 
to engagement in physical activity for people with multiple sclero­
sis: a qualitative investigation. Disabil Rehabil. 2011;33(8):625-642. 
doi: 10.3109/09638288.2010.505992.
	 [49]	 Vijayasingham L, Jogulu U, Allotey P. Work change in multiple scle­
rosis as motivated by the pursuit of illness-work-life balance: a 
qualitative study. Mult Scler Int. 2017;2017:8010912. doi: 10.1155/
2017/8010912.
	 [50]	 Gallagher S. Action and interaction. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 
2020.
	[51]	 De Jaegher H, Di Paolo E. Participatory sense-making. Phenom 
Cogn 
Sci. 
2007;6(4):485-507. 
doi: 
10.1007/s11097-007-
9076-9.
	 [52]	 Rumrill PD, Fraser RT, Johnson KL. Employment and workplace ac­
commodation outcomes among participants in a vocational con­
sultation service for people with multiple sclerosis. J Vocat Rehabil. 
2013;39(2):85-90. doi: 10.3233/JVR-130646.
	 [53]	 Jellie B, Sweetland J, Riazi A, et  al. Staying at work and living with 
MS: a qualitative study of the impact of a vocational rehabilitation 
intervention. Disabil Rehabil. 2014;36(19):1594-1599. doi: 10.3109/
09638288.2013.854842.
	 [54]	 Johnson KL, Fraser RT. Mitigating the impact of multiple sclerosis 
on employment. Phys Med Rehabil Clin N Am. 2005;16(2):571-582, 
x-xi. doi: 10.1016/j.pmr.2005.01.004.
	 [55]	 Bogenschutz M, Inge KJ, Rumrill PD, et  al. Barriers to and facilitators 
of employment among Americans with multiple sclerosis: results of a 
qualitative focus group study. J Rehabil. 2016;82(2):59-69.
	 [56]	 Sweetland J, Riazi A, Cano SJ, et  al. Vocational rehabilitation ser­
vices for people with multiple sclerosis: what patients want from 
clinicians and employers. Mult Scler. 2007;13(9):1183-1189. doi: 
10.1177/1352458507078414.

