Philosophical Explorations
An International Journal for the Philosophy of Mind and Action
ISSN: 1386-9795 (Print) 1741-5918 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rpex20
Why (getting) the phenomenology of recognition
(right) matters for epistemology
Hagit Benbaji
To cite this article: Hagit Benbaji (2022) Why (getting) the phenomenology of recognition
(right) matters for epistemology, Philosophical Explorations, 25:2, 232-250, DOI:
10.1080/13869795.2021.2021275
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13869795.2021.2021275
Published online: 07 Jan 2022.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 159
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rpex20

Why (getting) the phenomenology of recognition (right)
matters for epistemology
Hagit Benbaji
Philosophy, Ben-Gurion University, Beer-Sheva, Israel
ABSTRACT
Are kind properties (e.g. being a eucalyptus tree) presented to us in
visual experience? I propose an account of kind recognition that
incorporates two conﬂicting intuitions: (1) Kind properties are not
presented in the content of visual experience, (2) the application
of kind concepts aﬀects the phenomenology of experience. The
conjunction of these claims seems puzzling only given the
uniformity assumption that dominates theories of experience,
according to which experience presents all properties in the same
way: either by representing them ('the content view') or through
acquaintance with the object that instantiates them ('the object
view'). I have developed a hybrid account, according to which
experience has sensory content (i.e. of colors and shapes), but is
also an acquaintance with objects that are recognized as
instantiating kind properties. The motivation for the hybrid
account is that it can preserve the conﬂicting intuitions in a way
that shows them to be essential to a proper account of
perceptual reason and perceptual knowledge.
ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 27 July 2020
Accepted 20 August 2021
KEYWORDS
Kind-properties; content
view; object view; perceptual
reason; recognition; naïve
realism
1. Introduction
Visual experience, in presenting objects to us, presents them in speciﬁc ways; namely, as
having certain properties.1 Which properties are presented to us in visual experience?
Nearly everyone agrees that colors and shapes are presented to us in visual experience,
but not the property of, say, having been born in Jerusalem. Between colors and
shapes, on the one hand, and having been born in Jerusalem, on the other hand, are
various properties such as being a plate, being a bird, being a cardinal, being a computer,
being a tree, being a eucalyptus, and myriad other properties. Let us call the items in this
miscellaneous gray area 'kind properties' (K-properties2); are K-properties are presented to
us in visual experience?
Some ﬁnd it self-evident that kinds 'don't look—experientially—any diﬀerent on
becoming familiar' (Lyons 2005, 244). Others claim exactly the opposite, that, in present-
ing objects to us, visual experience obviously presents them as being of a certain kind:3
'we see4 the dappled deer grazing in groups on the vivid green grass' (Strawson 1979, 43).
This radical disagreement has elicited the resigned response that there is simply no fact of
© 2022 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
CONTACT Hagit Benbaji
benbaji@bgu.ac.il
Philosophy, Marcus Family Campus, Ben-Gurion University of the
Negev, P.O. Box 653, Beer-Sheva 8410501, Israel
PHILOSOPHICAL EXPLORATIONS
2022, VOL. 25, NO. 2, 232-250
https://doi.org/10.1080/13869795.2021.2021275

the matter about visually experiencing kind properties (Logue 2013), and even the caveat
that we ought to be 'very wary about relying on phenomenological "insights"' (Fish 2013,
48). Have we reached another impasse in the philosophy of mind?
In this paper, I reconcile what seems to be a clash of intuitions. I propose an account of
kind recognition that incorporates two claims: (1) K-properties are not presented in the
content of visual experience, but (2) the application of K-concepts aﬀects the phenomen-
ology of experience. The conjunction of these claims may seem puzzling: if kind proper-
ties are not presented in the content of experience, it would appear that seeing objects as
falling under concepts of such properties is a cognitive matter, a conceptual state that is
external to perceptual experience.5
I argue that the puzzle arises only given the uniformity assumption that dominates
theories of experience, according to which experience presents all properties in the
same way: either by representing ('the content view') or by being acquainted with
the object that instantiates them ('the object view'). Thus, the paper joins two
debates that are considered orthogonal: the debate over which properties are
present to us in experience and the debate over whether experience is represen-
tational or relational. I have developed a hybrid account according to which experience
has sensory content (i.e. of colors and shapes), but is also an acquaintance with objects
that are recognized as instantiating K-properties. McDowell has recently presented
such a mixture of elements as the best way to avoid the myth of the given. (McDowell
2009)6 In this paper, the sole motivation for the hybrid account is that it can account
for the conﬂicting intuitions above in a way that shows that there is something right
about each of them.
The thrust of the paper is that phenomenology matters to epistemology. That is, I
argue that the intuitions have epistemic import. After presenting the competing intui-
tions (section 2) and explaining why uniform theories cannot account for them (section
3), I develop the hybrid view in a way that shows how it accounts for both intuitions
(section 4). I then argue that both intuitions are crucial for the possibility of perceptual
knowledge of K-properties (section 5), so that the hybrid account is not only phenomen-
ologically, but epistemically, better than alternative theories (section 6).
Granting that the hybrid account combines insights from both the content and the
object view, it is committed to controversial claims: that experience both has content
and is a relation to objects; and that experience has a justiﬁcatory role both because it
has content, and because it is an acquaintance with objects.7 To be sure, this is taking
a lot for granted. I hope, though, that showing how such commitments dissipate the
seeming conﬂict between the intuitions, thereby contributing to our understanding of
perceptual knowledge, is a way of defending them.
2. Competing intuitions
A plausible condition of adequacy on theories of perception is that they make sense of
two conﬂicting 'intuitions' regarding the presence of K-properties in perceptual experi-
ence (2.1). Given the role I accord them in constituting a condition of adequacy on the-
ories of perception, I will brieﬂy address some empirical ﬁndings in order to clarify
them (2.2).
PHILOSOPHICAL EXPLORATIONS
233

2.1. The intuitions
Let us compare two visual experiences of a eucalyptus tree: that of an expert who can
recognize eucalyptus trees immediately upon seeing them, and that of a novice who
has never seen or heard of eucalyptus trees. The question of whether a eucalyptus tree
looks the same to the expert and the novice provokes contradictory intuitions.
One intuition is that the expert's visual experience diﬀers from that of the novice. Prior
visual experience renders the eucalyptoid nature of the tree in question salient among the
various objects in the expert's vicinity - he can spot the eucalyptus immediately (Siegel
2011, 108). This kind of tree is familiar to the expert - he has recognized it several
times in the past. The aptness of describing the kind as salient and familiar reﬂects the
capacity to see the tree as a eucalyptus. The intuition is that the tree looks some way
to the expert that it does not look to the novice. I will call the claim that one's visual
experience is changed by acquiring the capacity to recognize a tree as a eucalyptus
the 'diﬀerence' intuition.
The other intuition is that with respect to how the tree is visually presented to her, the
novice's experience is just like the expert's. The intuition says that what is given to us
'merely sensibly' or in the 'strictly sensory' sense (Siegel 2006, 484-85) remains constant
through changes in the perceiver's knowledge about what is being viewed. Nothing has
changed in how the tree aﬀects our visual sense before and after we learn that trees of this
sort are eucalyptus trees.8 Since the intuition can be generalized to any K-property, we
can also articulate it as saying that K-properties are not, strictly speaking, sensory proper-
ties, which are given to us 'by merely having the appropriate sense-organ aﬀected in the
way it is' (McDowell 2011, 9). I will call the claim that the way that visual experience, on its
own, presents the tree does not change in light of acquiring the capacity to recognize
eucalyptus trees the 'sameness' intuition.
The conﬂict between these intuitions seems to be straightforward. The diﬀerence intui-
tion claims that the capacity to recognize a eucalyptus tree changes one's visual experi-
ence of it, whereas the sameness intuition claims that visual experience presents a
eucalyptus tree to both the expert and the novice in the same way.
Making room for a third category between colors and shapes, on the one hand, and
properties such as having been born in Jerusalem, on the other hand, is tantamount to
ﬁnding a middle way between seeing and believing. The sameness intuition suggests
that visual experience presents us with no more than colors and shapes (together with
other spatial properties, e.g. size); thus, the experience of K-properties is not simply a
matter of seeing. The diﬀerence intuition suggests that it is not simply a matter of believ-
ing either: we do not merely believe that objects have K-properties, as we believe that the
person before us was born in Jerusalem.
Both aspects of K-properties - that they elicit conﬂicting intuitions and that they point
to a middle ground between seeing and believing - are present in Wittgenstein's descrip-
tion of the phenomenon of seeing as. We see the picture ﬁrst as rabbit-shaped and then as
duck-shaped, so that our experience of the ﬁgure changes - the ﬁgure ﬁrst has a certain
speciﬁc appearance, then, when we change perspective, a diﬀerent appearance. But at
the same time, we see that what is given to us in experience remains the same when
we change perspective. Wittgenstein famously describes this phenomenon as 'half
234
H. BENBAJI

visual experience, half thought' (1953, 197). What seems to perplex Wittgenstein is the
vacillation between the sameness intuition and the diﬀerence intuition:
What is incomprehensible is that nothing, and yet everything, has changed, after all. That is the
only way to put it. Surely this way is wrong: It has not changed in one respect, but has in
another. There would be nothing strange about that. (1980, §474)
2.2. A brief clariﬁcation of the sameness intuition
Since I take both intuitions as the data, it is important to address some empirical evidence
in a way that helps clarify them.9
According to current theories of informational processing, the organization of a ﬁgure
as opposed to ground is, 'given with the given', from the subject's perspective (Eilan 2013,
17). On this basis, Eilan argues that when I switch from, e.g. a vase to a double proﬁle in
the 'Rubin-vase,' the object of my visual experience changes completely, so that no prior
object common to the two experiences remains (Eilan 2013, 18), which seems to under-
mine the sameness intuition. By contrast, it is important to note that perceptual experi-
ences of K-properties, as well as some paradigm cases of aspect-switches (e.g. the
rabbit-duck diagram), do not involve a change in ﬁgure-ground segmentation. The
expert and the novice single out the very same object, it is just that the former sees it
as a eucalyptus, and the latter sees it as, say, a tree, or merely as an object. Thus, the same-
ness intuition is not about an array of colors and shapes that remains constant, rather, it is
about how visual experience alone presents the object. What remains the same is not just
an instance of, say, redness and an instance of squareness, but something that is both red
and square, and it is the same object that is recognized as falling under a certain kind.
Yet, it might be argued that even the most basic sensible properties do not remain the
same upon acquiring a recognitional capacity. Empirical evidence shows that there will be
diﬀerences in contrast for colors, and in orientation and determinacy for shapes, which
could not happen otherwise than in the course of acquiring the relevant recognitional
capacity.10 However, these changes are better explained by attention. As Price argues,
'After one learns to recognize pine trees, one starts to attend to those features of pine
trees that distinguish them from other trees, for instance, the colour or thickness of the
bark. ... ' (2009, 516). The attentional routines the expert has acquired make a diﬀerence
to how things seem to her. But her experience is the same as that of the novices insofar as
it is constituted by the same sensory features of the tree.
Such division of phenomenal labor between visual experience and attention might be
resisted. Scientiﬁc evidence has shown that attention can dramatically change what we
visually experience: the more you focus attention on something, the more determinate
are the properties you can visually experience of that thing (Nanay 2011).11 But even if
attention can change visual experience, it is unlikely that it does so in cases of aspect-
switches and perception of K-properties. With regard to cases of aspect-switches, since
we can bring the phenomenal change by shifting our focus from one element of a rep-
resented scene to another at will (Speaks 2010, 336), while visual experience cannot be
brought about at will, the shift in aspect-switches has to be the result of a post-perceptual
attentional relation to properties given to us in visual experience, rather than the result of
changes in visual experience itself. With regard to perception of K-properties, since we
PHILOSOPHICAL EXPLORATIONS
235

standardly perceive them without attention,12 and since we cannot perceive K-properties
without perceiving sensory properties, we perceive those sensory properties that are
necessary for the perception of K-properties also without attention. This, in turn, suggests
that the shifts in a certain complex of sensory properties can be explained as due to a
post-perceptual attentional relation that leaves visual experience as is: the object
remains sensorily the same, but attention changes which sensory properties, or cluster
of them, are in focus.
For those who remain skeptical about the status of the sameness intuition, precisely,
whether it is, indeed, an intuition, let me emphasize that the thrust of the paper is that
phenomenology matters to epistemology, that is, there are epistemological consider-
ations in favor of the sameness intuition. For the rest, I take it as a constraint on theories
of perception that they elucidate the phenomenon of recognition in a manner that show
that there is something right about both intuitions, namely, in recognizing something as a
eucalyptus, 'nothing, and yet everything, has changed.'
3. Why uniform accounts cannot account for both intuitions
According to the uniformity assumption, experience is either a representational state,
which has content, or a relation to objects and their properties. The uniformity assump-
tion implies that all concepts aﬀect the phenomenology of experience in the same way:
either by being part of the content or by being applied to the object given to us in experi-
ence by an act of recognition. By 'the phenomenology of experience' I mean what is
usually referred to as 'the phenomenal character of experience,' which is identiﬁed
with 'what is it like to undergo the experience' or 'the ﬁrst-person perspective in percep-
tual experience' (Siegel 2019).
I argue that the content view is vulnerable to the following dilemma. If K-concepts are
part of the content of experience, the sameness intuition is inexplicable. If K-concepts are
applied to experience by an extra-perceptual cognitive act, the diﬀerence intuition is inex-
plicable (section 3.1). I then show that the object view's switch to diﬀerent 'looks' of the
same object fails to account for the nature of the conﬂict (as well as for the sameness
intuition, section 3.2).
My focus in this section is thoroughly phenomenological: I seek to explore the extent
to which each view can account for the intuitions vis-à-vis the phenomenon of recog-
nition. The phenomenological condition of adequacy requires merely that we should
'do justice to' both intuitions, i.e. account for them in a way that shows that there is some-
thing right about each of them. Although failure to do so should not be considered a
deﬁnitive argument against the uniform accounts, it is certainly a deﬁciency of any pro-
posed account of kind recognition.13
3.1. The content view
On the content view, experience is a kind of intentional state that represents things as
thus and so. The content of experience is either conceptual or non-conceptual. Let me
take each alternative in turn.
On the conceptual content view, all concepts aﬀect the phenomenology of experience
by constituting its content. Thus, if the acquisition of K-concepts changes the
236
H. BENBAJI

phenomenology of experience this is because they enter into the content of visual experi-
ences, just like concepts of colors and shapes. Recognition or seeing as is visually repre-
senting as. Hence, the conceptual content view cannot account for the sameness
intuition: once one acquires the concept of a eucalyptus, it ﬁgures in the content of
experience, and the content of experience does not remain the same.
Proponents of the conceptual content view may argue that it can account for the intui-
tion of sameness by virtue of the fact that the experience of seeing a eucalyptus rep-
resents the tree's color and shape in the very same way before and after acquisition of
the capacity to recognize a eucalyptus. It is just that on top of having a certain color
and shape, the tree is now also represented as having a K-property; but part of the
content remains the same.
The intuition of sameness is not, however, that some components of the content of
experience remain the same. There is nothing paradoxical in saying that part of the
content of experience remains the same, while part of it has changed. The sameness intui-
tion implies that the way visual experience alone presents the object to us has not
changed at all (nor has it partly changed).
On the non-conceptual content view, the experience has content, that is, it represents
objects to us as having certain properties. However, since the content is non-conceptual,
it represents an object as having basic visual properties, such as colors and shapes, rather
than properties the representation of which presupposes that we have such concepts as
'being a eucalyptus.' Sensory experience is unaﬀected by acquiring the concept of a euca-
lyptus; thus, K-concepts can only aﬀect beliefs.14 Kind recognition is, then, as Tye claims, a
matter of coming to know, reliably, on the basis of visual experience, that this is a euca-
lyptus tree.15
But if this is so, the expert's capacity to recognize a eucalyptus collapses into a reliable
disposition. If kind recognition is, as Tye claims, a matter of coming to know (or believe)
that this is a eucalyptus, upon seeing the tree, the non-conceptual content view cannot
explain why a eucalyptus looks diﬀerent to a botanical expert; it cannot explain why the
experience itself, rather than beliefs based on it, has changed. The non-conceptual
content view can't account for the diﬀerence intuition; i.e. the opposite problem to the
one facing the conceptual content view.
Note that it does not help the non-conceptual content view to claim that visual experi-
ence represents objects as having K-properties non-conceptually (which seems implausi-
ble anyway). The question is why a eucalyptus tree looks diﬀerent to the expert. If the
eucalyptus were represented non-conceptually, the novice could experience it as well.
But the diﬀerence intuition is that the novice experiences the tree diﬀerently than the
expert, which remains unexplained by adding K-properties to the non-conceptual rep-
resentational content of experience.
The non-conceptualist may argue that seeing something as a eucalyptus can be
accounted for in terms of perceptual calibration, and perceptual calibration should not
involve concepts. What distinguishes the expert from the novice is not something concep-
tual - concepts don't enter into it. And - yes - the novice could undergo the same experi-
ence provided they undergo similar perceptual training. Acquiring the concept - whatever
that means independently of undergoing said training - is no part of the explanation.16
This conception of the non-conceptual content view, however, falls into the same
objection as the conceptual content view, namely, that it cannot account for the
PHILOSOPHICAL EXPLORATIONS
237

sameness intuition. Perceptual calibration for K-properties, on this view, changes the phe-
nomenology of experience by changing its content, and nothing remains the same.
3.2. The object view: the possibility of 'two looks'
The object view denies that experience has any content at all. Instead, experience consti-
tutes acquaintance with objects and their properties. Experience merely brings things to
view. Since the experience lacks content, the object view does not face the dilemma
regarding K-concepts. Although concepts are not part of experience, they are not phe-
nomenologically inert; concepts can change the way an object appears. Seeing an
object as falling under a concept invokes an 'in between' act of conceptual 'registration,'
which is 'an irreducibly primitive notion' (Brewer 2011, 145) that changes the way an
object appears. Brewer calls such looks 'thick' looks (Brewer 2011, 121).
What is this thick look? Brewer replies by contrasting a thick look with a 'thin' look.
Something's having a thin duck-look is a matter of the presence of that particular
animal to a point of view from which the visually relevant similarities it has with
various paradigms of duck-hood are salient. To see an object 'thinly' is simply to be
acquainted with it. Thus, a duck looks 'thinly' duck-like even to a child who has no
idea what a duck is - it merely requires that the child inhabit the said point of
view. When the child acquires the concept of a duck, she can recognize that the
concept is applicable - the child 'registers,' as Brewer puts it-that is, she can see
the animal in question as a duck. This 'thick' look 'is a further genuinely phenomeno-
logical aﬀair associated with our conceptual classiﬁcatory engagement with ... that very
duck' (Brewer 2011, 125).
On the face of it, the object view seems to account for the two intuitions. It accounts for
the sameness intuition in that the thin look - bare acquaintance with the object itself - is
the same for the expert and the novice. It accounts for the diﬀerence intuition in that the
expert, but not the novice, sees the object's thick look, and the thick look is a 'genuinely
phenomenological aﬀair.' Indeed, thick and thin looks seem to articulate the phenom-
enon of seeing as:
Recognition—of a cloud as shaped like a bull, or of a doodle as a distorted name, say—is both
classiﬁcatory and phenomenological. In one sense it changes the way the thing in question
looks; in another sense the shape it looks is entirely unchanged. (Brewer 2011, 123)
The thin look accounts for the sameness intuition; the thick look accounts for the diﬀer-
ence intuition.
Although this way out of the dilemma is formulated in terms of the object view, it is
open also to the content view on the non-conceptual version of it. The proponent of
the view that experience has non-conceptual content could simply add a 'conceptual
look,' e.g. another layer of content, to the non-conceptual content of experience, in the
way the object view has it. Such a multi-layered content view seems to incorporate the
intuitions in the spirit of the object view. The non-conceptual content remains the
same, while the conceptual layer of content has changed by the acquisition of the new
conceptual capacity.
Yet the idea of two distinct looks falsiﬁes the phenomenology that gives rise to the
seeming conﬂict. The seeming conﬂict is not, pace Brewer, between two looks, two
238
H. BENBAJI

diﬀerent ways the object strikes us, as the diagram can strike us as either a duck or a rabbit
(in this sense, the analogy is misleading). The tree strikes the botanical expert diﬀerently
now from the way it struck him before he acquired the capacity to recognize a eucalyp-
tus-the tree's look has changed. Given our recognitional capacities, reconstructing the
object's sensible look is a matter more abstract than the question of how it strikes us.
That is, it is not a purely phenomenological aﬀair (similarly, once we see the ﬁgure as a
duck or a rabbit it is hard to reconstruct a 'neutral' duck-rabbit drawing, that is neither
a rabbit nor a duck).
I deny that the object retains a sensory look that is distinct from the non-sensory think-
able look made by recognition. As I unpack the sameness intuition, it is not about how the
object looks, or how the object strikes us, but about what is given to us in visual experience
alone, without an extra-sensory act of conceptual registration. We are aware that even
when the object strikes us as a eucalyptus, there has been no change in what visual experi-
ence itself does for us, that is, in how visual experience alone presents the object. This aware-
ness is, to be sure, a phenomenological matter, but it is not a matter of 'sensory look'.
When the object strikes us as a eucalyptus, it does not also strike us as having a mere
sensory look. The experience of the botanical expert is not 'saddled with' two looks of
the tree.
Furthermore, on the object view, there is no diﬀerence between the way colors and
shapes are visually given to us, and the way being a tree or being a eucalyptus is visually
presented. An object thinly or thickly looks like a eucalyptus just as it thinly or thickly looks
green. Hence, the object view also fails to preserve the sameness intuition. The intuition is
not merely that the visual experience does not change; rather, the intuition is that the
visual experience of the object does not change with regard to its sensible properties, i.e.
colors and shapes. We see that the shape of the diagram remains unchanged when we
shift from seeing it as a duck to seeing it as a rabbit. When we ask the expert what
remains the same, he is not perplexed, but refers to the color and shape of the object.
The object view cannot account for this response, because K-properties have the same
status, vis-à-vis visual experience, as colors and shapes. There is a thin look of eucalyptus
as there is a thin look of greenness. Similarly, there is a thick look of eucalyptus as there is
a thick look of greenness.
Notice that these objections to the relational theory of experience do not depend on
the speciﬁc commitments of Brewer's object view.17 Perhaps other leading advocates of
the relational view may account for the sameness intuition by giving special roles to
colors as properties that can be selected rather than accessed (Campbell 2011).
However, even if they can account for the sameness intuition, the problematic notion
of 'two looks' or some surrogate of it (two layers of content) is essential to any relational
or non-conceptual content view. Granting that visual experience is non-conceptual, the
extra-sensory act of recognition cannot aﬀect it - visual experience itself remains impene-
trable to conceptual changes. Thus, the (conceptual) change in phenomenology that is
brought by recognitional capacities must be, then, a further 'look' of the object, over
and above how visual experience presents it.
To recap the phenomenological argument against uniform accounts: the conceptual
content view does not account for the sameness intuition; the non-conceptual content
view does not account for the diﬀerence intuition; and the object view does not
PHILOSOPHICAL EXPLORATIONS
239

account for the nature of the conﬂict (Brewer's object view fails to account for the same-
ness intuition as well).
4. The hybrid view: how to accommodate the conﬂicting intuitions
Uniform theories of experience cannot show that there is something right about each of
the intuition. I will now present the hybrid view, as I call it, in a way that makes it tailor
made to account for both intuitions.
We have seen that if K-properties aﬀect the phenomenology of experience by being
re/presented in visual experience, the sameness intuition cannot be accounted for. It
follows from my criticism of the conceptual content view, that K-properties are not
part of how visual experience alone presents the object. Thus, the concept of eucalyp-
tus should be applied to the tree given to us in experience in an extra-sensory act of
recognition, as it is on the object view. The hybrid account is committed, then, to the
following:
1. K-properties are not part of how visual experience re/presents the object, but are
recognized in an extra-sensory act of recognition, as it is on the object view.
Although K-properties are not part of how visual experience re/presents the object, in
order to account for the diﬀerence intuition, we must make sense of how the application
of K-concept aﬀects the phenomenal character of visual experience. The objection against
the relational views (or non-conceptual content views) shows that if visual experience
itself is non-conceptual, the extra-sensory act of recognition cannot aﬀect it - visual
experience itself remains impenetrable to conceptual changes, and we are stuck with
two looks (or two layers of content). Hence, in order to make sense of the claim that recog-
nitional capacities change the phenomenology of visual experience itself, visual experi-
ence must be conceptual - it is the look of the object seen as something with certain
colors and shapes that is changed when we recognize the same object to be a eucalyptus.
Thus, the hybrid view accepts the following as well:
2. Concepts of colors and shapes are part of the content of visual experience.
3. The application of K-concepts aﬀects the phenomenology of visual experience.
Claims 1 and 2 bring out what the sameness intuition gets right, that is, roughly, that as
far as the content of experience is concerned, there is no diﬀerence between the novice's
and the expert's experience of the eucalyptus tree. What remains the same before and
after acquiring the capacity to recognize K-properties is what visual experience presents
to us on its own, without the help of extra-sensory conceptual capacities. Claim 3 brings
out what the diﬀerence intuition gets right, that is, roughly, that when one acquires the
recognitional capacity for eucalyptus, one sees the object as a eucalyptus - this alters the
way one sees the object - it changes the phenomenology of experience.18
Importantly, on the hybrid account, visual experience has content, but its phenomen-
ology is not exhausted by its content. When the expert sees the tree as a eucalyptus, the
object's look - the only look it has - has changed. Before acquiring the recognitional
capacity the object is seen as something with certain colors and shapes; after mastering
240
H. BENBAJI

the capacity, the same object is seen as falling under a speciﬁc kind. Since the content of
experience is conceptual, the conceptual change that is brought by the act of recognition
can be a change in the phenomenology of experience itself, that is, precisely, in the look of
the object. It need not constitute a further conceptual look, as it is on relational and non-
conceptual content theories.
Claim 3 highlights the inextricable link between seeing and recognition. Siegel argues
that if recognition is due to some extra-sensory cognitive act, 'then there would have to
be an event in the stream of consciousness, other than the event of seeing, that allegedly
has the phenomenology.' But, she claims, there need not be 'an extra event, beyond
sensing, for the phenomenological change to take eﬀect' (2006, 495). Perhaps on rela-
tional views recognition should be felt as something 'extra' that has its distinct phenom-
enology, a further 'look,' over and above the look it has by virtue of visual experience. But
this is precisely what the hybrid account denies. Recognition changes how the object
looks - it aﬀects the phenomenology of visual experience itself, thus, it need not be
experienced as 'an extra' event.
Let me emphasize that the phenomenological change of visual experience has
nothing to do with qualia and the like. First, the phenomenology of visual experience
on its own is determined by the content of experience. Second, the phenomenological
change that is brought by recognition is neither motivated by, nor explicable in terms
of, the idea of qualia (qualia of eucalyptus?), but in terms of non-sensory properties of
physical objects, that are presented to us upon seeing the object as falling under K-
concepts.
The account is hybrid in that it adopts elements from both the content and the
object views. The hybrid account acknowledges two ways concepts can aﬀect the phe-
nomenology of experience - by being part of the content and by being applied to the
object given in experience. Thus, like the conceptual content view, the hybrid account
accepts that visual experience is conceptual, it presents to us objects as having certain
colors and shapes. Like the object view, it accepts that K-concepts are a matter of
recognitional capacities that are applied to, rather than being part of, the content of
experience.
The hybrid view should be distinguished from other disuniﬁed theories of perceptual
experience. Importantly, unlike dual-component theories (Berger 2015),19 inherited from
Reid, which construe perceptual experience as a composite of sensation and belief, the
hybrid view is not a two components account. Although the experience has both phe-
nomenology and content, these are not two diﬀerent mental states (a mere sensation
+ a belief) but two aspects of perceptual experience itself. Further, although dual-com-
ponent theories also combine naïve realism and representationalism (Reiland and
Lyons 2015), they do so in diametrically opposed way to the combination developed
by the hybrid view. First, they take the sensory properties to be given in acquaintance,
as naïve realism has it, while K-properties are merely represented in experience
(Cavedon-Taylor 2015). On the hybrid view, it is just the opposite: sensory properties
are re/presented in the content of experience, while K-properties are given to us in recog-
nizing objects to be of certain kinds, as naïve realism has it. Second, such views take the
sensory component to be non-conceptual, while the hybrid view is conceptual through
and through.20
PHILOSOPHICAL EXPLORATIONS
241

5. Beyond phenomenology: the epistemic signiﬁcance of the intuitions
The hybrid view is not motivated just by phenomenological considerations. My central
claim is that the intuitions have epistemic import, that is, each of the two phenomenolo-
gical intuitions bears on the epistemology of perceptual knowledge.
5.1. The epistemic import of the diﬀerence intuition
If the diﬀerence intuition cannot be accounted for, so that acquiring a recognitional
capacity for eucalyptus has no bearing whatsoever on perceptual experience, how can
knowledge of eucalyptus be perceptual?
A proponent of the non-conceptual content view, which cannot account for the diﬀer-
ence intuition (see 3.1), might appeal to reliability. There is no reliable causal connection
between any type of visual experience and the property of having been born in Jerusa-
lem, whereas there is a reliable causal connection between certain types of visual experi-
ence and the property of being a eucalyptus tree: under normal conditions, a speciﬁc
pattern of colors and shapes indicates that this is a eucalyptus tree. Given a reliable con-
nection, one can come to know that a tree is a eucalyptus immediately upon seeing it
(Millar 2011, 334),21 and there is no need to talk of how the tree looks.
However, the chicken-sexer, who can reliably get the gender of the chick right without
any conscious experience of the chick's gender, is a counterexample to reliabilist theories.
The chicken-sexer knows the gender of the chick upon seeing it, but merely coming to
know that this chick is male upon seeing it does not change how the object looks to
her. The knowledgeable judgment of the chicken-sexer is phenomenologically inert. This
phenomenological fact has epistemic counterpart: her experience is not an immediate
reason for her belief; her knowledge is, at best, inferential. Admittedly, the chicken-
sexer's judgment is psychologically non-inferential: seeing the chick may prompt a knowl-
edgeable judgment about its gender, without reﬂecting on her expertise. But though the
judgment is psychologically non-inferential, there is no way to show it to be justiﬁed
'except by invoking the inferences whose goodness reﬂects her reliability, the inferences
she admittedly does not need to make' (McDowell 2010, 140). When we ask the chicken-
sexer how she knows that this chick is a male, she has nothing to say but, 'I know how to
tell a male from female upon seeing one'. Her justiﬁcation must depend on her expertise,
for her experience does not tell her anything about the gender of the chick.
By contrast, the botanical expert does not merely ﬁnd himself with 'a yen to apply
some concept - a conviction that it has application in the immediate vicinity' (Evans
1982, 124). Rather, his experience of the tree makes his inclination to apply the
concept of a eucalyptus intelligible to him. The fact that the tree looks like a eucalyptus
to him means that he does not have to appeal to his own reliability - that he has a
reason for his belief. His knowledge is made intelligible by experience, that is what
makes it perceptual knowledge (Bayne 2009, 12).
Without the diﬀerence intuition, the two experts are on a par. In both cases, the expert
sees the object and immediately, in a psychological sense, applies a concept to it; in both
cases, the experience is reliably connected to the judgment; in both cases, the expert
knows that he or she is reliable. If there is no diﬀerence in the experts' respective experi-
ences, that is, if their experience is equally silent about the kind of thing that is in view, the
242
H. BENBAJI

experience of a eucalyptus tree cannot be a reason for the judgment about eucalyptus any
more than the experience of a chick is a reason for the chick-sexer's judgment. Theories
that cannot account for the diﬀerence intuition, such as the non-conceptual content view,
must ascribe to the botanical expert what the chicken-sexer has, namely, merely a reliable
inclination to judge that this is a eucalyptus.
Let me emphasize that I rely on the claim that experience is a source of reasons for our
beliefs about K-properties. Thus, even if the claim that the two judgements are not equally
justiﬁed can be explained along quasi-externalist lines - say, by invoking 'design' argu-
ments, or 'cognitive processing' arguments (Bergmann 2006, Ch. 5), this would not be
enough for the epistemic role of the diﬀerence intuition. The fact that the tree looks like
a eucalyptus to the botanical expert, while the chick does not look male to the chicken-
sexer, means that the experience of eucalyptus is a reason for judgments of the kind
while the experience of the chick merely reliably causes judgments of its gender. Travis
nicely expresses the link between phenomenology and epistemology as follows: 'Looking
like, on this notion, is a matter of things, or something, having a certain rational force regard-
ing some given proposition; a certain bearing on the thing to think' (2004, 15).
The diﬀerence intuition is, then, necessary for explaining the rational force of experi-
ences of K-properties; it grants that to recognize a kind is to have an immediate perceptual
reason for judgments about that kind, and hence, allows for the possibility of perceptual
knowledge of K-properties. If we cannot account for the diﬀerence intuition, so that
recognitional capacities for K-properties do not aﬀect experience at all, justiﬁcation by
experience becomes too hard: there is no appropriate relation between the experience
(which re/presents merely sensory properties) and the corresponding judgement
(about K-properties), and the experience loses its rational force altogether - it cannot
be a non-inferential reason for judgments about K-properties.
5.2. The epistemic force of the sameness intuition
On the other hand, if we cannot account for the sameness intuition, so that K-properties
are re/presented in experience just like sensory properties (as it is on the conceptual
content view), I argue that justiﬁcation by experience becomes too easy.
To get a better grip on what I mean by 'too easy', suppose that the chicken-sexer would
start talking as if 'males look diﬀerent' to her. Such talk seems like an inﬂation of looks
(what is peculiar in the case of the chicken-sexers is that they do not have a look of the
sex of the chick). But how can such an inﬂation of looks be resisted? In virtue of what
does the botanical expert have a look of eucalyptus, while the chicken-sexer does not
have a look of a male chick?
The crucial diﬀerence between them is that the botanical expert can identify the
sensory properties, e.g. colors and shapes, that the kind 'eucalyptoid' has while the
chicken-sexers 'have no idea what features of the chicks they are presented with they
are responding diﬀerentially to' (Brandom 2002, 97). They cannot specify the visual
cues they are relying on (McDowell 2010, 140-42). Importantly, the chicken-sexer sees
the chick's sensory properties, but there is, from her perspective, no intelligible connec-
tion between what she sees and the content of her thought 'this chick is male.' That is
why 'we cannot make their judgement intelligible in terms of the way the chicken
looks to them' (Roessler 2009, 1029).
PHILOSOPHICAL EXPLORATIONS
243

Let me identify the appeal to visual cues with the capacity to see the sensory properties
of the objects in the look of a eucalyptus. The appeal to sensory properties can explain why
'being a eucalyptus tree' unlike 'being a male chick' has a look because the look is revealed
in the object's sensory properties, as the duck and the rabbit are revealed in the drawing.22
The botanical expert can appeal to what has remained the same vis-à-vis visual experience
(e.g. the colors and shapes), thus making the claim that the tree looks like a eucalyptus
substantive. The epistemic signiﬁcance of the sameness intuition lies in the fact that,
when we identify the sensory cues, we appeal to something that is given to us by
visual experience alone, thus granting that seeing an object as a eucalyptus is, indeed,
seeing a genuine look of the object.
Let me emphasize that I do not argue that when we ask the botanical expert to
describe his experience of the tree, he will start 'talking about lights and colours,
patches and patterns' (Strawson 1979, 43). The appeal to the tree's sensory properties
does not reduce the concept of eucalyptus to concepts of sensory properties, or clusters
of low-level features that are 'recognitionally coextensive' with the K-concept (Block
2014). The appeal to visual cues for recognizing a eucalyptus presupposes having the
concept of a eucalyptus. I should also concede that often, we are unable to describe
the relevant sensory features. As Austin (1946) claims, 'nearly everybody can recognize
a surly look or the smell of tar, but few can describe them non-committally, i.e. otherwise
than as "surly" or "of tar"' (156).23 Siegel also gives the example of a doubtful face to show
that no surrogate of sensory properties can substitute K-properties in the content of
experience. However, even though a doubtful look is irreducible to lines and shapes,
when we see a face as doubtful, we can point to, e.g. the lines between the eyebrows,
to substantiate the claim that the face looks doubtful.
On the face of it, proponents of the conceptual content view or of the object view that
cannot account for the sameness intuition can also explain the relevance of the sensory
cues, because these properties are part of the content of experience, or the thick look of
the object, respectively. However, though they can do so, on these views, the appeal to
sensory cues is epistemically irrelevant. This is because on both views, seeing a eucalyptus
changes the phenomenology of experience just as seeing sensory properties changes the
phenomenology of experience, i.e. by changing its content or the thick look it has (the
concept of eucalyptus enriches the content of experience, or makes the thick look of a
tree with certain colors and shapes thicker). Accordingly, all knowledge is based on experi-
ence in the same way, so that when the request for justiﬁcation arises ('why do you
believe that this is a eucalyptus?'), the reply 'it looks like a eucalyptus' is of the same
kind as 'it looks green.' Granted, the botanical expert could point to sensory properties
on these views, but he needs not do so, because the sensory properties are not given
to him anyway diﬀerently than the property of being a eucalyptus tree. Thus, the fact
that the chicken-sexer cannot appeal to sensory cues is explanatorily inert.
It might be argued that the appeal to sensory cues is, indeed, epistemically redundant.
Some philosophers argue that we - just like the chicken-sexer - are not responding to
visual cues when we perceive K-properties:
... our situation with respect to ordinary objects and properties is quite similar to the chicken
sexers' position. I see an apple on the shelf. Why do I believe that the thing is an apple? My
real reason is: ''it just looks that way''. Now if you question my reason, it indicates to me that
244
H. BENBAJI

you do not share this reason. So it is quite likely that I will descend to a lower epistemic status
and give you reasons in terms of its shape and color, reasons that I think you can have. ... But
these are not my real reasons (Masrour 2011, 383).
There is no need to appeal to visual cues, according to Masrour, for I need not be, as the
chicken-sexer is not, consciously responding to any speciﬁc set of sensory properties. Our
real reason to judge that a certain tree is a eucalyptus is just that it looks that way.
As I emphasized, I do not claim that my reasons for the judgment 'this is a eucalyptus' is
the set of sensory properties. This would make the justiﬁcation by experience merely
inferential (as it relies on beliefs regarding the tree's sensory properties). Nevertheless, I
claim that were the diﬀerence between the experts exhausted in that it looks like a euca-
lyptus to the one but does not look male to the other, it would seem ad hoc. No wonder
that those who dismiss the appeal to visual cues, dismiss any diﬀerence between the
experts. Thus, they argue that 'males look diﬀerent' to the chicken-sexer (Lyons 2009,
104-6), or that 'from the chicken sexer's point of view, the chicks just look that way ...
the chicken-sexer has a non-sensory experience of the sex of the chick, which provides
a reason for her belief' (Masrour 2011, 383).24 As I claimed, this seems to me an
inﬂation of looks. Such inﬂation of looks would be hard to resist, I argue, unless there is
something that visual experience itself does for the botanical expert that it does not
do for the chicken-sexer, i.e. gives him visual cues.
When it comes to the sensory properties themselves, e.g. redness, all we can reply is,
indeed, that it looks red to us. We can do nothing to explain how the thing's color looks
except by pointing to the property given in experience ('it looks like that'). But the bota-
nical expert can explain to the novice why the tree looks like a eucalyptus to him, by
directing her attention to the particular shape of the branches, to the dark shade of
green, etc. Such explanations may enable the novice to acquire the recognitional capacity
herself, and thereby come to see the tree as a eucalyptus. To paraphrase Moore, when we
try to introspect on the experience of seeing a eucalyptus, we can say more than 'all we
can see is a eucalyptus.' We can point to a speciﬁc sort of leaf, colored a deep green, a
wide and heavy brown trunk, etc. The sameness intuition allows us to see the application
of the concept to an object in experience as a change of the look of the object - that is
why it is indeed, a look.
The epistemic dilemma I presented in this section is, then, as follows. If K-concepts
play the same role as concepts of colors and shapes (as on the conceptual content
view and the object view), so that the sameness intuition cannot be accounted for,
there is no epistemic relevance to the sensory cues, and justiﬁcation by experience
becomes too easy - it just looks that way. On the other hand, if K-concepts do not
aﬀect experience at all (the non-conceptual content view), so that the diﬀerence intui-
tion cannot be accounted for, justiﬁcation by experience becomes too hard: there is no
appropriate relation between the experience and the corresponding judgement, and
the experience loses its rational force altogether - it cannot be a non-inferential
reason for judgments about K-properties.
The dilemma shows that accounting for both intuitions is required to explain the epis-
temic diﬀerence between the experts. The diﬀerence intuition implies that there is a phe-
nomenological diﬀerence between them. The sameness intuition implies that this
diﬀerence must be grounded in how visual experience presents the object.
PHILOSOPHICAL EXPLORATIONS
245

6. The hybrid view: two kinds of reasons
Finally, let me explain how the hybrid view escape the dilemma, and why it does that
better than the relational or non-conceptual content theories. The comparison
between these views reveals why the phenomenological falsiﬁcation of 'two looks' or
'two layers of content' also has an epistemic counterpart.
The hybrid view ascribes to experience content and phenomenology, and thus provides
us with two models of knowledge and justiﬁcation. The ﬁrst is exempliﬁed by the content
model, in which experience justiﬁes beliefs by sharing its content. Since the content of
experience is composed of sensory concepts, request for justiﬁcation ('how do you
know?') can be answered with the simple reply: 'because I see that there is a red cube there.'
Yet, experience not only places objects in our view as having certain colors and shapes,
it also gives us opportunities to acquire perceptual knowledge of the kinds they fall under.
Although the content of visual experience does not include concepts of K-properties,
knowledge of what it is to be a eucalyptus arises non-inferentially from seeing the tree
and recognizing it to be a eucalyptus. But if the concept of a eucalyptus tree is not
part of the content of the visual experience, we cannot simply answer, when the requests
for justiﬁcation arises, 'because I see that this is a eucalyptus.'25 How does this experience
constitute a non-inferential reason for the judgment that there is a eucalyptus tree over
there?
Knowledge of eucalypti should be understood on the model of object-awareness,
developed by the object view. The rational force of experience is not a matter of inferen-
tial relations between contents, but of acquainting us with things and their properties.
The core phenomenon is that of subsuming an object given in acquaintance under a
concept. By presenting an object to the subject, it is the object perceived that is supposed
to be the reason for the belief about it:
Given her grasp of the concept in question, acquaintance with O makes its application to that
very object evidently correct. It is the ground for her registration of precisely the similarities
that constitute the truth of the application in question (Brewer 2011, 144).
But how does acquaintance with O make application of the concept of a eucalyptus to
that very object 'evidently correct'?
I argue that the 'two looks' view cannot satisfactorily respond to this challenge. On
such views, acquaintance with O constitutes the 'thin', non-conceptual sensory look.
The look of eucalyptus is conceptual - it is the application of the concept of eucalyptus
to an object given in experience. So how does the thin look of O make the application
of the concept of eucalyptus 'evidently correct'? The thin look is independent of, and
thus cannot be recognized in the thick look. In other words, we cannot identify the
sensory cues in the look of a eucalyptus. But if we cannot recognize the thin look in the
thick look, we cannot recognize the contribution of visual experience to the knowledge
of eucalyptus, and hence, it remains unclear how acquaintance with O makes the appli-
cation of the concept of a eucalyptus to that very object 'evidently correct'. This is the
epistemic counterpart of the phenomenological falsiﬁcation of the two looks.
Contrast the 'two looks' view with that of the hybrid account. On the latter, recall, the
content of experience is conceptual, so that recognition changes that very look, the
sensory look of the object, the look it has solely by virtue of visual experience. When the
246
H. BENBAJI

botanical expert recognizes the eucalyptus, the visual look is, as it were, integrated into the
thick look. This is why the phenomenological change is a change in the phenomenal char-
acter of experience itself. Although the expert is aware of the fact that what visual experi-
ence itself presents to him remains the same (the sameness intuition), this awareness is not
a separate, 'thin' look that the object retains over and above its looking like a eucalyptus. As
I've argued, to claim that recognition changes the phenomenology of visual experience is to
accept that in terms of 'how the object strikes us' - 'everything has changed.'
This is crucial, I argue, for understanding how acquaintance with O makes application
of the concept to that very object evidently correct. When we apply the concept of euca-
lyptus to O, we see it as a eucalyptus, and when we see it as such, we can see the sensory
properties in the look of a eucalyptus. Our capacity to recognize the object's sensory prop-
erties in the look of a eucalyptus enables us to recognize the contribution of visual experi-
ence itself to this look, and in this way, it is, indeed, acquaintance with O that makes
application of the concept of a eucalyptus to that very object 'evidently correct.' Recog-
nition is an awareness of how what we see, i.e. the sensorially-present object, is a reason
for applying the concept of a eucalyptus.
Thus, on the hybrid view, to recognize a kind is to be aware of the immediate percep-
tual reason for judgments about that kind. Note that an awareness of a reason is not yet a
belief or knowledge. One's possession of knowledge is in turn to be explained by refer-
ence to one's responsiveness to that reason. Recognition actualizes a conceptual capacity,
and as such, constitutes a reason (as opposed to an inexplicable yen) to judge that the
thing we see falls under the concept of a K-property. Though this actualization of a con-
ceptual capacity is extra-sensory, it is not the active application of a concept to an object,
that is, it is not a judgment or belief. As it is on the object view, when all goes well, as is
ordinarily the case, there are no grounds for suspicion, this actualization of a concept
counts as knowledge (that the tree is a eucalyptus) simply 'by default.' When we
suspect that we are in the presence of a fake eucalyptus tree, the tree looks familiar
and salient nonetheless; it is still seen as a eucalyptus.26 In this sense, recognition is
passive, i.e. belief-independent: it is independent of beliefs about how things are
(Travis 2004; Brewer 2011, 146).
But if perceptual recognition is neither seeing nor believing, then what is it? Brewer
emphasizes that there is no reductive account for it. We should take it to be an in-
between mode of awareness, a case of 'seeing as' (Brewer 2011), seeing the object as a
reason for judgment about its kind. As Wittgenstein suggests, since recognition is an
extra-sensory actualization of a concept, it is 'half thought.' But it is not just thought.
Since the actualization of the concept of a eucalyptus is made intelligible to us by the sen-
sorially-present object, it is also 'half visual.'
Notes
1. Use of the generic term 'presentation' is compatible with various views on experiential
content: propositional content, conceptual albeit non-propositional content, non-conceptual
content, and no content at all. Though the discussion is open-ended in this respect, I will
argue that the best account of perception of K-properties does ascribe conceptual content
to experience.
2. This term was coined by Siegel (2011).
3. See, e.g., Siegel (2006) and Bayne (2009).
PHILOSOPHICAL EXPLORATIONS
247

4. Note that here 'seeing' is not being used in the purely extensional sense, whereby a bird can
be said to see, e.g., the prime minister; the classic exposition of this point is Dretske (1969).
5. It is simply a matter of 'being able to infer more sophisticated beliefs from a more or less
stable perceptual content.' (Speaks 2005, 390)
6. McDowell's inspiration for this paper can be found in Travis (2004). See also Brewer (2011).
7. McDowell (2013) argues for this point.
8. See Stalnaker (1998).
9. For this section, I'm indebted to an anonymous referee.
10. This objection to the sameness intuition underwrites one of the leading strategies against the
conceptual content view. For it explains the diﬀerence in phenomenology by the diﬀerent
complex of low-level surrogates that is 'recognitionally coextensive' with the K-properties.
See, e.g., Block (2014), Seigel and Byrne (2016), Nanay (2011), and Prinz (2013).
11. See Watzl (2011).
12. Roessler (2009, 1030). Fish (2013) argues on the basis of empirical data that K-properties are
perceived in the absence of attention.
13. I'm indebted to an anonymous referee for this formulation of the phenomenological con-
dition of adequacy on theories of experience.
14. For views that take the content of perception to be partly conceptual and partly non-concep-
tual see the next section.
15. On Tye's view, recognition includes two components, a cognitive state and a sensory experi-
ence. See Tye (1995, 215).
16. I thank Arnon Cahen for this objection.
17. I thank an anonymous referee for urging me to clarify this point.
18. The ﬁrst two claims are argued for in McDowell's recent revision of his account of visual
experience (McDowell 2009, 261). I think that they leave an explanatory lacuna that is
answered by claim 3. I will come back to this lacuna in section 6.
19. I thank an anonymous referee for pressing me to elaborate on these views.
20. The motivation for 'impure relationalism' is the denial of disjunctivism regarding perception
of K-properties. The hybrid view, by contrast, is open to disjunctivism with regard to all
properties.
21. 'Millar is not in the business of oﬀering a reductive account of recognitional capacities in
terms of reliable belief-forming methods.' Thanks to an anonymous referee for clarifying
Millar's view (Millar 2011).
22. 'For I may say something looks to me "like a nail" when it appears to me (visually) constant in
size and shape in a manner typical of nails—i.e., it looks to me the way nails look.' (Siewert
2013, 202)
23. I thank an anonymous referee for pressing me to clarify the requirement to appeal to sensory
properties.
24. Or, as Noordhof (2018) puts it, the chicken-sexer 'would, upon inspecting a chick, take the
chick to look one sex or another and, on the basis of that, judge the sex accordingly' (91).
25. On this challenge to McDowell, see Gersel, Jensen, and Thaning (2017).
26. See, e.g., Siegel (2006, 494); Travis (2004); Brewer (2011).
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Hilla Jacobson and Arnon Cahen for their crucial substantive comments. Lastly,
I would also like to thank two anonymous referees whose objections and suggestions greatly
improved the paper.
Disclosure statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the author(s).
248
H. BENBAJI

Funding
This paper was supported by the Israel Science Foundation (Research Grant Application no. 1168/
16).
Notes on contributor
Hagit Benbaji's main research is in metaphysics and the philosophy of mind. She focuses on the
nature of colors, perception, and emotions, as well as on the connections between these three
themes. Her research interests also include epistemology, practical rationality, and metaethics.
References
Austin, John L. 1946. "Other Minds." Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Supplementary Volumes
20: 148-197.
Bayne, Tim. 2009. "Perception and the Reach of Phenomenal Content." The Philosophical Quarterly
59 (236): 385-404.
Berger, Jacob. 2015. "The Sensory Content of Perceptual Experience." Paciﬁc Philosophical Quarterly
96 (4): 446-468.
Bergmann, Michael. 2006. Justiﬁcation Without Awareness: A Defense of Epistemic Externalism. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Block, Ned. 2014. "Seeing-as in the Light of Vision Science." Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research 89 (3): 560-572.
Brandom, Robert B. 2002. "Non-inferential Knowledge, Perceptual Experience, and Secondary
Qualities: Placing McDowell's Empiricism." In Reading McDowell: On Mind and World, edited by
Robert Brandom, 92-105. New York: Routledge.
Brewer, Bill. 2011. Perception and its Objects. New York: Oxford University Press.
Campbell, John. 2011. "Visual Attention and the Epistemic Role of Consciousness." In Attention:
Philosophical and Psychological Essays, edited by Christopher Mole, Declan Smithies, and
Wayne Wu, 323-342. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cavedon-Taylor, Dan. 2015. "Kind Properties and the Metaphysics of Perception: Towards Impure
Relationalism." Paciﬁc Philosophical Quarterly 96 (4): 487-509.
Dretske, Fred. 1969. Seeing and Knowing. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Eilan, Naomi. 2013. "On the Paradox of Gestalt Switches: Wittgenstein's Response to Kohler." Journal
for the History of Analytical Philosophy 2 (3): 1-21.
Evans, Gareth. 1982. The Variety of Reference. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fish, William. 2013. "High-level Properties and Visual Experience." Philosophical Studies 162 (1): 43-
55.
Gersel, Johan, Rasmus Thybo Jensen, and Morten S. Thaning. 2017. "McDowell's New Conceptualism
and the Diﬀerence Between Chickens, Colours and Cardinals." Philosophical Explorations 20 (1):
88-105.
Logue, Heather. 2013. "Visual Experience of Natural Kind Properties: Is There any Fact of the Matter?"
Philosophical Studies 162 (1): 1-12.
Lyons, Jack. 2005. "Perceptual Belief and Nonexperiential Looks." Philosophical Perspectives 19: 237-
256.
Lyons, Jack. 2009. Perception and Basic Beliefs. New York: Oxford University Press.
Masrour, Farid. 2011. "Is Perceptual Phenomenology Thin?" Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research 83 (2): 366-397.
McDowell, John. 2009. "Avoiding the Myth of the Given." In Reprinted in Having the World in View:
Essays on Kant, Hegel, and Sellars, edited by John McDowell, 256-272. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
McDowell, John. 2010. "Brandom on Observation." In Reading Brandom: On Making it Explicit, edited
by Bernhard Weiss and Jeremy Wanderer, 139-154. New York: Routledge.
PHILOSOPHICAL EXPLORATIONS
249

McDowell, John. 2011. "Anscombe on Bodily Self-knowledge." In Essays on Anscombe's Intention,
edited by Anton Ford, Jennifer Hornsby, and Frederick Stoutland, 128-146. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
McDowell, John. 2013. "Perceptual Experience: Both Relational and Contentful." European Journal of
Philosophy 21 (1): 144-157.
Millar, Alan. 2011. "How Visual Perception Yields Reasons for Belief." Philosophical Issues 21: 332-351.
Nanay, Bence. 2011. "Do We See Apples as Edible?" Paciﬁc Philosophical Quarterly 92 (3): 305-322.
Noordhof, Paul. 2018. "Evaluative Perception as Response-Dependent Representation." In Evaluative
Perception, edited by Anna Bergqvist, and Robert Cowan, 80-108. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Price, Richard. 2009. "Aspect-Switching and Visual Phenomenal Character." The Philosophical
Quarterly 59 (236): 508-518.
Prinz, Jesse. 2013. "Siegel's get Rich Quick Scheme." Philosophical Studies 163 (3): 827-835.
Reiland, Indrek, and Jack Lyons. 2015. "The Disunity of Perception: An Introduction." Paciﬁc
Philosophical Quarterly 96 (4): 443-445.
Roessler, Johannes. 2009. "Perceptual Experience and Perceptual Knowledge." Mind; A Quarterly
Review of Psychology and Philosophy 118 (472): 1013-1041.
Siegel, Susanna. 2006. "Which Properties are Represented in Experience?" In Perceptual Experience,
edited by Tamar Szabó -Gendler, and John Hawthorne, 481-503. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Siegel, Susanna. 2011. The Contents of Visual Experience. New York: Oxford University Press.
Siegel, Susanna. 2019. "The Uneasy Heirs of Acquaintance." Philosophical Issues 29 (1): 348-365.
Siegel, Susanna, and Alex Byrne. 2016. "Rich or Thin?" In Current Controversies in Philosophy of
Perception, edited by Bence Nanay, 59-80. New York: Routledge.
Siewert, Charles. 2013. "Intellectualism, Experience, and Motor Understanding." In Mind, Reason, and
Being-in-the-World, edited by Joseph Schear, 204-236. New York: Routledge.
Speaks, Jeﬀ. 2005. "Is There a Problem About Nonconceptual Content?" The Philosophical Review 114
(3): 359-398.
Speaks, Jeﬀ. 2010. "Attention and Intentionalism." The Philosophical Quarterly 60 (239): 325-342.
Stalnaker, Robert. 1998. "What Might Nonconceptual Content Be?" Philosophical Issues 9: 339-352.
Strawson, Peter Frederick. 1979. "Perception and its Objects." In Perception and Identity: Essays
Presented to A. J. Ayer, edited by Graham MacDonald, 41-60. London: Palgrave.
Travis, Charles. 2004. "The Silence of the Senses." Mind; A Quarterly Review of Psychology and
Philosophy 113 (449): 57-94.
Tye, Michael. 1995. Ten Problems of Consciousness: A Representational Theory of the Phenomenal
Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Watzl, Sebastian. 2011. "The Philosophical Signiﬁcance of Attention." Philosophy Compass 6 (10):
722-733.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. 1953. Philosophical Investigations. Oxford: Blackwell.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. 1980. Remarks on the Philosophy of Psychology, Volume II. Oxford: Blackwell.
250
H. BENBAJI

