Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology
ISSN: 0007-1773 (Print) 2332-0486 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rbsp20
Kant's Anti-Scientism and the Origins of
Phenomenology
Richard McDonough
To cite this article: Richard McDonough (1998) Kant's Anti-Scientism and the Origins of
Phenomenology, Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology, 29:3, 281-298, DOI:
10.1080/00071773.1998.11008532
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00071773.1998.11008532
Published online: 21 Oct 2014.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 49
View related articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rbsp20

Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology, Vol. 29, No. 3, October 1998 
KANT'S ANTI-SCIENTISM AND THE ORIGINS OF 
PHENOMENOLOGY* 
RICHARD McDONOUGH 
It is indeed very evident that I cannot know as object what I must presuppose in order to 
know any object, ... 
Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, A 402 
Old and new philosophies were and remain naively objectivistic. It is only right, however, to 
add that German Idealism, beginning with Kant, was passionately concerned with 
overcoming [this] naivete. 
Husser!, The Crisis of European Man, p.l81. 
Many philosophers have found many different views in the rich pages of 
Kant's corpus. In the present century, each of the mechanistic and the 
phenomenological traditions have claimed Kant as an intellectual ancestor. 
Of course, there is a sense in which both could be correct. It is undeniable 
that among Kant's primary aims is to lay the metaphysical foundations for 
something like a Newtonian mechanics of nature, and this could be true even 
if other aspects of Kant's system, e.g., his account of the self, is more akin to 
that in the phenombnological tradition. Recently, however, Kant's account of 
the self, both empirical and transcendental, has been claimed as an early 
version of contemporary mechanistic cognitive science. In the most detailed 
statement of this view, Kitcher claims that in his transcendental psychology 
Kant is "offering hypothesis about the mechanisms that carry out [cognitive] 
tasks" (1987, p.215; 1990b, p.206).' 
The most important single impediment to the mechanistic view of Kant is 
the "notorious" passage (Hatfield, p.217) in the Preface to the Metaphysical 
Foundations of Natural Science where Kant states unambiguously that one 
cannot have a science of the soul. 
[T]he empirical doctrine of the soul must always remain even further removed than 
chemistry from the rank of ... a natural science proper. This is because mathematics is 
inapplicable to the phenomena of the internal sense and their laws, unless one might want to 
take into consideration merely the law of continuity in the flow of this sense's internal 
changes .. The reason for the limitation of this extension of cognition lies in the fact that the 
pure internal intuition in which the soul's phenomena are to be constructed is time, which 
has only one dimension. But not even as a systematic art of analysis or as an experimental 
doctrine can the empirical doctrine of the soul ever approach chemistry, because in it the 
manifold of internal observation is separated· only by mere thought, but cannot be kept 
separate or connected again at will; still less does another thinking subject submit to our 
investigations in such a way as to be conformable to our purposes, and even the observation 
itself alters and destroys the state of the object observed. It can therefore never become 
anything more than an historical (and, as such, as much a possible) a systematic natural .. 
281 

description of the soul, but not a science of the soul, nor even a psychological experimental 
doctrine .... This is the reason why ... the name of natural science ... belongs to the doctrine 
of body alone (MFNS, p.8). 
Kitcher claims that Kant's reason for this view is only that, whereas a 
science must be quantitative, Kant held that one cannot quantify items in 
inner sense (Kitcher, 1990a, p.209n21). But whereas Kitcher deals with only 
the first of Kant's reasons, Keni.p Smith (1962, p.321n2) notes that the 
passage contains as many as five reasons why one cannot have a science of 
psychology, 
[Kant's] reasons are- (I) that, as time has only one dimension, the main body of 
mathematical science is not applicable to the phenomena of inner sense and their laws; (2) 
that such phenomena are capable of merely ideal, not of experimental analysis; (3) that as 
the objects of inner sense do not consist of parts outside each other, their parts are not 
substances, and may be conceived as ... passing out of existence without prejudice to the 
permanence of the principle of substance; (4) that inner observation is limited to the 
individual's own existence; (5) that the very act of introspection alters the state of the object 
observed. 
Whereas the basic faith of the mechanistic tradition is that one can 
understand the self as another object in Nature, the founding insight of the 
phenomenological tradition is Kant's view that the self cannot be understood 
as an object in the world (C1, A402). As Paton puts it, "By 'matter of 
knowledge' Kant seems to mean 'matter for knowledge of objects' (as 
opposed to subjects) [P's emphasis]" (1951, vol I, p.99n4). The key passage 
in the Preface to MFNS is nothing other than the further articulation of the 
fundamental ontological differences between a self and a mere object. In 
fact, this passage may be regarded as an early blueprint for a phenomenology 
of the self. Husserl incorporates each of the points in that passage into his 
transcendental phenomenology. Kitcher's inability to handle the whole of 
this passage is, therefore, understandable, for it is a seminal text for the non-
naturalist tradition of phenomenology developed by Husserl. 
Section I argues that Kemp Smith's argument that the consistent 
development of the Critical Philosophy supports a mechanistic psychology is 
textually inaccurate. The main positive point of this section is that the most 
basic reason why Kant holds that psychology cannot be a science is that he 
limits the category of substance to bodies in space. At the same time, he 
holds that since we have a natural tendency to model cognitions on bodies in 
space, Kant actually explains why we continue to demand a cognitive 
science even in the face of its manifest failures. 2 
Section II shows that the key passage from MFNS is a seminal text in the 
development of Husserl's non-naturalist phenomenology. Section III shows 
the continuity of Kant's positive account of the empirical self with Husserl. 
The claim is not that Kant has invented phenomenology, but that the key 
passage from MFNS creates the place for one. The paper concludes by 
extending the general point to include Heidegger and others. 
282 

I. Kemp Smith's Argument for the Mechanistic Interpretation 
It is worthwhile considering Kemp Smith's classic argument for the 
mechanistic interpretation of Kant because many commentators accept 
Kemp Smith's authority that the basic issue has been settled. Kemp Smith 
(1962, pp.311-312) notes that Kant is tom between competing views. On the 
one hand, he holds that both inner and outer phenomena constitute a "unitary 
system" of phenomena, and on the other hand he equates the principle of 
substance with that of the conservation of matter. The former supports, while 
the latter undermines, the possibility of a natural science of psychology. 
Though he thinks that Kant never reconciled these views, Kemp Smith and 
others regard the former as the consistent extension of the Critical 
philosophy (Kemp Smith, 1962, pp.311-312; see Guyer, 1992a, p.14 & 
1992b, p.127). 
In opposition to Kemp Smith, I argue that a modified version of the anti-
mechanistic view does reconcile the two views. Kant denies that items of 
inner sense causally interact with bodies in space. But he also holds that the 
objects of outer and inner sense comprise a certain kind of unity. The unity 
of outer and inner sense must, therefore, be other than a simple causal 
community (anticipating Husser!' s view that the unity is constituted 
intentionally). But before I sketch Kant's view, let us consider Kemp Smith's 
evidence for his mechanistic interpretation. 
Commenting on B291-292 where Kant says that "the objective reality of 
the categories requires not merely intuitions but outer intuitions [K' s 
emphasis]"), Kemp Smith holds that Kant is "maintaining that the categories 
can acquire meaning only by reference to outer appearances" (1963, p.311). 
But does Kant mean that though the categories acquire meaning by reference 
to objects in space, they can be extended to objects in inner sense? Or do the 
categories apply only to objects in space? 
Kemp Smith, with Guyer and others, defends the first option (Kemp 
Smith, 1963, p.311; Guyer, 1987, p.307). The passages to which Kemp 
Smith refers (See Kemp Smith, pp.311n5 & 275, n1) do not support his 
view. For example, at C1 A28-29, Kant writes 
Colours are not properties of the bodies ... but only modifications of the sense of sight, 
which is affected in a certain manner [emphasis added] by light. 
Kant does not say that the senses causally interact with light. Rather, he 
qualifies the claim by saying that they are "affected in a certain manner". So 
the question ought to be, what is the meaning of this qualification, and why is 
it necessary just here? 
Kemp Smith also claims that in the Opus Postumum "it is asserted in at 
least twenty-six distinct passages that sensations are due to the action of 'the 
moving forces of matter' on the sense organs" (p.275nl). But the sense 
organs are material bodies. So the claim that they are causally affected by 
283 

material forces does not show that mental states are causally affected by 
material bodies (Paton, p.318 & nl). And the view that sensations are "due" 
to the action of matter on sense organs is far too vague on which to base the 
causal interpretation. 
Kemp Smith points out that Adamson takes the view opposite to his own 
when he holds that the categories . are limited to the material sciences, but 
that Adamson recognizes that "the absence of a priori elements from our 
mental life" is inconsistent with Kant's fundamental principle that sense 
alone is not sufficient for apprehension (Kemp Smith, p.311n4 ). But the 
expression "absence of a priori elements" is ambiguous. Whereas Kemp 
Smith and Adamson share the assumption that they either do or do not apply, 
with no middle ground, I argue that Kant holds that the categories do not 
literally apply to the items in inner sense, but that they do have in this 
connection an analogical use. So they are not completely absent. 
In the "Final Purpose of the Natural Dialectic of Human Reason" referring 
to the psychological Idea, Kant states that the psychological Idea enables one 
to construct a psychology "as if [Kant's emphasis] the mind were a simple 
substance which persists" (A672/B700). Shortly thereafter, referring to these 
Ideas, Kant writes that this enables one to represent our relation to appear-
ances as analogous to the relation between appearances (A674/B702). The 
relation in which appearances stand to each other is, of course, the causal 
relation. So, in application to the psychological Idea in particular, this is the 
claim that Reason requires us to represent the relation of the self to appear-
ances on analogy with causal relations between appearances. Kant reformu-
lates this view in the Anthropology (p.152). 
That Kant is not at A674/B702 in the first Critique referring to the Idea of 
a noumenal self but rather to a psychological Idea for empirical use, is 
shown by the fact that he there concludes, 
If, in this manner ... we do not really extend our knowledge beyond the objects of possible 
experience; we extend only the empirical unity of such experience [emphasis added]. 
Here Kant tells us that "the unity of phenomenal existence" is achieved by 
mediation of the regulative use of the Ideas of reason. Kant's rejection of 
rational psychology is currently in favor (Hatfield, p.223). But what has ·not 
been sufficiently appreciated is that Kant's empirical psychology is built on 
the non-constitutive (A644/B672) Ideas of that rejected Rational Psychology 
- and this yields mere analogues to the concepts appropriate to corporeal 
bodies. That, and not the bare point that mathematics has only minimal 
application to inner sense, is why Kant holds that empirical psychology 
cannot be a science. 
On the present view, the two sides of Kant's thought are reconciled. The 
categories apply literally only to objects in space. So there can be a natural 
science only of corporeal bodies. Yet, under the regulation of Reason, they 
284 

obtain an analogical use in inner sense. The unity of phenomenal existence, 
though inadequate for the mechanistic project, is secure. 
The doctrine of analogical representation is entrenched in the first 
Critique. In the Refutation of Idealism, Kant writes, 
[I]n order that we may ... make inner intuitions ... thinkable, we must represent time (the 
form of inner sense) figuratively as a line, and the inner alteration as a drawing of this line 
(motion), and so in this manner by means of outer intuition make comprehensible the 
successive existence of ourselves in different states (B291-2; see A33/B50 & Kemp Smith, 
p.310). 
It is as fundamental a thesis as is present in the first Critique that "time 
cannot be perceived" (A177/B219, A182/B225. A189/B233, A211/B257). 
Kant makes a virtue of this necessity and argues that it is therefore necessary 
to represent time by space, and cognitions in time by matter in space. Indeed, 
this series of dependencies is basic to the argument that the categories apply 
to objects in nature. But it also means that we can make time and the states 
of the self in time "thinkable" only by imperfect analogy with space and 
states of things in space. 
The claim is not that Kant's theory of analogical concepts is adequate as it 
stands. On the contrary. It is that Kant here establishes the place for an 
account of intentional connections between cognitions (or cognitions and 
objects). Section III argues that Husserl sees the mechanistic picture of a 
causal connections between distinct cognitions as an analogical way of 
representing the intentional connections between cognitions. 
This Kantian view that the domain of cognitions cannot be adequately 
captured by the categories of substance and causality suited to bodies in 
space is precisely what cannot be reconciled with the mechanistic project. As 
Husser! points out, 
One who has been trained in the natural sciences takes it for granted that whatever is merely 
subjective must be eliminated ... (CEM, p.l85). 
The naturalist philosopher requires a strategy for eliminating the 
subjective. Husserl describes this strategy, 
To follow the model of the natural sciences almost inevitably means to reify consciousness 
(PRS, p.l03). 
Indeed, Kant's view that we have no choice but to conceptualize cognitions on 
imperfect analogy with bodies in space clarifies the source, in human reason, 
of this naturalistic reification. Whereas the cognitive scientists are eager to 
give in to this ingrained tendency towards reification, Kant's view is that the 
reification of cognitions is an error which must be resisted. Indeed, it is in this 
Kantian spirit that Husser! writes that what is required is that one "overcomes 
naturalism ... through a heroism of reason" (CEM, p.192). Kant initiates this 
"heroism of reason" by making clear that though we have an inherent tendency 
to reify cognitions, this reification fails to capture the peculiar being of 
cognition. Whereas Kant has prepared the place for a positive account of items 
285 

of inner sense, it was for Husserl to recognize that Kant's view that items in 
inner sense are conceived on imperfect analogy with bodies in space begs for 
a proper positive account, which is appropriate to the phenomena. 
II. Kant and the Foundations of Phenomenology 
Whereas Kitcher only deals with the first of Kant's objections to a science 
of psychology, the view that one cannot quantify items in inner sense, Kant 
gives in the Preface to MFNS as many as five reasons in all. Let us consider 
these one at a time. 
/.Psychology not an experimental doctrine 
Kant's second reason why psychology cannot be a science is that 
psychology is not "an experimental doctrine". Husserl has similar reserva-
tions about the role of experimental method in psychology, 
Exact psychology is not aware that herein lies a serious defect in its procedure, especially as 
it becomes alarmed at the method of introspection and spends its energy trying to overcome 
the defects of the experimental method by the experimental method itself (PRS, pp.92-93) 
Husserl holds that even if there is a derivative role for experiment in 
psychology, that experimental psychology presupposes a prior account of 
cognitions appropriate to the phenomena. 
Kant's account illuminates Husserl's view. Kant's point is that cognitions 
obtain in time which has only one dimension. But in order to experiment with 
entities one must be able to reidentify them at different times. In that case they 
must be reidentifiable substances. But the only reidentifiable substances are 
bodies in space. That is, in order to be reidentifiable over time, an item must 
have a body which is independent of time. Since cognitions lack the requisite 
spatial dimensions, one cannot reidentify them over time, and so cannot 
conduct experiments with them (Cf. Hatfield, 1992, p.222). 
One can say that Snow has the same thought as yesterday. This does not 
mean that it is numerically the same, but that it is a similar thought. That 
judgement of similarity does not provide the kind of permanent substratum 
that one needs for a proper experimental method. Kant's point about the one-
dimensionality of time is not, therefore, captured by Kitcher' s argument that 
mathematics does not apply to time. Kant's argument, and the derivative 
point about the inapplicability of the experimental method, is, rather, an 
argument which derives from the more basic denial of the category of 
substance to items in inner sense. 
2. Cognitions not subject to analysis 
Kant's third argument in the key passage is that "the manifold of internal 
observation is separated only by mere thought, but cannot be kept separate or 
connected again at will". Kant's claim is, as Kemp Smith puts it, that 
286 

cognitions admit only of "ideal, not experimental analysis", they "do not 
consist of parts outside each other, their parts are not substances". Since, in 
Kant, the categories of substance and causality are correlative categories, this 
also implies that causality does not apply to the changes in inner sense. 
Again, the key point is not that mathematics does not apply to items in inner 
sense, but that cognitions are not composed of substantial parts. The point 
about mathematics is derivative from this. Once again, Husser! agrees, 
Everything that ... we call a psychical phenomena, when looked at in and for itself, is 
precisely phenomenon and not nature .... A phenomonon has ... no real parts, no real 
changes, and no causality .. .in the sense proper to natural science [emphasis added] (PRS, 
p.l 06; see L/, I, p.352). 
Husser! makes clear that mental entities are not substances, 
[The] psychical ... retains no enduring, identical being that would be objectively 
deteminable in the method of natural science, e.g., objectively divisible into components, 
"analysable" in the proper sense [all emphasis added] (PRS, p.l07). 
Rips agrees with Husserl that "if there's one assumption that comes naturally 
to cognitive scientists, it's that mental activities can be divided into parts" 
(1990, 267; see Fodor, 1987, p.138; etc.). Compositional theories of 
representation, the view that the content of a representation is a function of 
the content of its parts, are the rule in cognitive science. 
It is instructive to note how pervasive the compositional model, and, with 
it, the idea that one can assemble and disassemble cognitions as if they were 
bodies in space, is. In 1967 Davidson wrote that "It is conceded by most 
philosophers of language ... that a satisfactory theory of meaning must give an 
account of how the meanings of sentences depend on the meaning of words." 
(1967, p.17). Recently, Schiffer writes that what "Davidson observed can still 
be observed today" (1989, pp.3, 179). The same model is true of cognitive 
science. In 1975 Fodor wrote that the "cognitive models ... of natural 
languages ... which sensible people now endorse ... must ... have a vocabulary 
composed of a finite inventory of discrete meaningful elementary items" 
(1979, p.123). Fodor gives an atomistic '"mental chemistry' [emphasis added] 
approach to the psychology of concept learning" (Ibid., p. 96). Naturally, 
Kitcher attributes a compositional model to Kant (1990b, p.74) and extends 
this model of synthesis to cognitive states as well as to material states. 
Cognitive states will be connectable by synthesis only if there are functions of synthesis over 
them (1990b, p.l44). 
If this synthesis over cognitive states is possible then it must be possible to 
isolate elements of cognitive states, what she calls "temporal arrays", just as 
one can isolate the elements of corporeal bodies, or "spatial arrays" (1990b, 
pp.161-162). 
One reason why the compositional model is so pervasive is that it is the 
founding view of 'analytical philosophy'. Russell puts the point in the 
'material mode', 
287 

It is quite clear [that) there is the possibility of cutting up a fact into the component parts, of 
which one component may be altered without altering the others (1968, pp.l93, 195) 
Whereas it is often claimed that analysis is a method which is metaphysically 
neutral, in fact, the 'method' of analysis goes hand in hand with the 
metaphysics of mechanism. 
The analysis of cognitions into their alleged 'parts' is required in order to 
explain how it is that cognitive states are 'realized' in corporeal bodies. In 
order to avoid mysteriously emergent mental powers, one must hold that, 
'Everything mental must make some physical difference'. As Fodor puts it, 
"the causal relations among the physiological states of the organism respect 
the semantic relations among the formulae" of mentalese (1979, p.78, 110). 
This presupposes the correspondence thesis, the view that it must be possible 
to correlate the elements of the mental and material entities. Honderich 
writes, 
The correlation hypothesis thus asserts ... [that] identical neural events, if accompanied by 
mental events, are accompanied by identical mental events (1988, p.l 08). 
This presupposes that it must be possible to identify independently both 
mental and physical elements. Recently, the correspondence thesis has 
come in for criticism on a variety of grounds (Goldberg, 1968; Putnam, 
1980; McDonough, 1989). Kant's denial of discreteness for mental parts 
means, at minimum, that talk of "identical mental events" is, at best, 
misleading. If mental 'parts' are not discrete items, then they cannot have 
discrete identity conditions. And if, as is often said, 'there is no entity 
without identity', then Kant's claim is that the 'parts' of mental events are 
not real in the required sense - that they are as Kemp Smith says, merely 
"ideal". 
Since Kitcher reads her own analtyic/mechanistic agenda into Kant she 
must explain why Kant provides no account of the intrinsic nature of 
cognitive states or representations (1990b, p.75). In fact, Kant's "notorious" 
remarks in the MFNS, his view that cognitive states do not consist of parts 
outside each other, is precisely the denial that they have an intrinsic nature, 
that they are structured "arrays" of parts, in the sense required in order to be 
possible material for synthesis. In fact, Kant's denial of mental parts signals 
his opposition to analysis in the sense of modern analytical philosophy. 
Indeed, this is the fundamental reason why Kitcher is, as it were, duty bound 
to misinterpret Kant's anti-analytic and anti-mechanistic passage in MFNS.' 
Of course, Husser! holds that the Kantian denial of the atomistic (analytic) 
prejudice is not the whole story. Husser! writes, 
Worst of all are the new psychological reformers, who are of the opinion that the entire fault 
lies in the long-dominant atomistic prejudice, that a new era has been introduced with 
wholistic psychology (CEM, p.l88). 
Husser! is a certain kind of holist about cognitions (McDonough, 1987, 
pp.ll7-118 & sect. III). By this criticism of holistic psychologists he only 
288 

means the denial of the atomistic prejudice which must be supplemented by 
a more complete anti-natualistic account of psychological being (CM, p.38). 
That brings us to Kant's final two reasons why one cannot have a science of 
psychology. 
3. The lneliminability of Subjectivity 
Kant's fourth reason why one cannot have a science of psychology is that 
"another thinking subject [does not] submit to our investigations in such a 
way as to be conformable to our purposes". Of course, Husserl agrees, 
There never has nor ever will be an objective science of the spirit, ... objective in the sense 
that it permits the attribution of existence under the forms of spatia-temporality to souls or to 
communities of persons ( CEM, p.l88). 
Indeed, if "the forms of spatio-temporality" are the categories of substance 
and causality that apply to objects in objective space-time, then the point is 
once again that there can never be a science of psychology because a proper 
account of mind can never be founded on the category of substance. 
Well aware of the dangers of solipsism (CM, pp.30, 89-150), Husserl 
nevertheless holds that consciousness is primarily consciousness of one's 
own subjective states (L/, II, p.858). Husserl's primary aim is to chart out the 
science of this "absolute subjectivity" (CM, pp.30, etc.). Whereas this point 
is commonly seen as the thesis that minds have privileged access to their 
own states, Husserl sees in it a far more important theme, 
The spirit and in fact only the spirit is a being in itself and for itself: it is autonomous and is 
capable of being handled in a genuinely rational, genuinely and thoroughly scientific way 
only in this autonomy (CEM, p.l88). 
When Kant writes in the MFNS that "another subject" does not submit to our 
purposes, he implies that one's own subject does submit to "our purposes". 
Kant is on the brink of the view that, as Husserl puts it, the self is 
autonomous in this sense, and that a science of psychology must build on 
this autonomy. 
Finally, it is important to stress that even this point about the autonomy of 
psychology is derivative from the basic denial of the category of substance to 
items in inner sense. For if one insists on imposing the categories (substance, 
causality, etc.) of the objective natural sciences on psychology, then one 
must miss the real psychological phenomena ( CEM, p.l87). The autonomy 
of psychology requires that psychology is not an objective natural science 
concerning substances in Nature. 
4. Psychical Being not Independent of the Observer 
Kant's fifth reason why one cannot have a science of psychology is that 
"even the observation itself alters and destroys the state of the object 
observed". Again, Husserl agrees, 
Psychical being ... is in principle not a unity that could be experienced in several separate 
289 

perceptions of the same subject. In the psychical sphere, there is ... no distinction between 
appearance and being ( CEM, p. 106; see/, p.ll2). 
This contrasts with perception of a corporeal substance, where the substance 
exists independently of the perception of it. 
This places the seal on Kant's view that there cannot be a psychological 
science. If an objective science requires anything, it is that the observation 
does not qualitatively alter what is observed. The fact that this condition is 
satisfied in natural science\ but not in psychology, means that the notion of a 
reidentifiable substance is inapplicable to psychology. Once again, the denial 
that cognitions are composed of substances, not the denial of mathematics to 
inner sense, is the key to Kant's view. 
5. Summary 
Whereas Kitcher only faces the first of Kant's five reasons, Kant has, in 
fact, a multiplicity of reasons why psychology cannot be a science. More 
important, these are related by the fact that each is a further amplification of 
the basic view that the category of substance does not apply to items in inner 
sense. The passage in the Preface to MFNS has a rich internal structure 
which is seminal for the development of Husserl's phenomenology. But 
there is far more to that passage than has yet emerged. 
Ill. Kant's Positive Account of the Empirical Self 
1. The Continuity of the Flow in Inner Sense 
After saying that one cannot quantify items in inner sense, Kant immedi-
ately reverses himself and says that one can perhaps quantify the flow of 
changes in inner sense. On the present interpretation, this reversal, and 
Kant's lack of concern in making it, makes sense. For Kant's fundamental 
point is not that mathematics does not apply to internal sense, but that 
whatever quantities are in the inner sense cannot be quantities of substance! 
It is not mathematics per se, but the mathematics of enduring reidentifiable 
substance which is denied to inner sense. The mathematics of enduring 
reidentifiable substance is mechanics. 
More significant, Kant has thereby demarcated a positive subject matter 
for phenomenology. For the question should now only be, what sort of 
account can be given of the "flow" of change in inner sense. Husserl again 
takes up where Kant leaves off, 
What psychical being "is", experience cannot say in the same sense that it can [for] the 
physical. The psychical ... appears as itself through itself, in an absolute flow as now and 
already "fading away", clearly recognizable as constantly sinking back into a "having been" 
(PRS, p.l07). 
In his notion of the flow of cognitions, Husserl is developing the notion of a 
psychical process which possesses its own type of internal unity. Husserl 
writes that cognitions 
290 

... in their temporal flow, are not an incoherent stream of subjective processes. Rather, they 
flow away in the unity of a synthesis, such that in them, "one and the same" is intended as 
appearing (CM, p.39; /, p.l50). 
Whereas the subject matter of the natural sciences are substances which are 
distinct from their appearances and endure through successive appearances, 
phenomenology is, in large measure, the description of those unities which 
are constituted internal to "the flow" of the phenomena. So the question 
becomes, what is the appropriate sort of description for these phenomenal 
unities? 
Again, the outline of a positive conception of the unity of the flow is 
implicit in Kant. As Kemp Smith points out, Kant's denial that cognitions 
are composed of substances means, first, that their alleged 'parts' are "ideal", 
and, second, that they do not consist of parts outside each other? This is not 
merely a negative doctrine, but suggests that successive cognitions in a 
temporal series are logically interconnected, specifically, that they are 
identity-dependent on each other. Kant's account of the process in inner 
sense is a version of the doctrine currently known as externalism, with the 
difference that temporal rather than spatial relations are invoked in content-
individuation. 
Externalism about mental states traces to the conclusion of Putnam's 
(1975) twin-earth argument. The conclusion of that argument is that the very 
identity of mental states is logically or metaphysically, rather than causally, 
dependent on the presence of substances in the environment of the thinking 
subject. Whether Sis thinking of H20 or of Putnam's XYZ logically depends 
on whether the transparent liquid in S's environment is H20 or XYZ. 
Externalism is the view that mental states are relational entities in the sense 
that the very identity of a mental state depends on its relations to items in the 
relevant environment. Externalism is, therefore, a version of holism in the 
sense that the identity of the mental item is determined by its relatedness to 
the relevant embedding whole. 
Whereas most versions of externalism stress the spatial environment of 
the subject, McGinn writes: "Temporal relations also matter, if not quite so 
much" (1989, pp.21 & n29). On Kant's account of the empirical self, by 
contrast, temporal relations are of primary importance. If a given mental 
state is identity-dependent on a temporal sequence of mental states, then the 
empirical self is a diachronic phenomenon (essentially spread out over time). 
This explains why Kant says in the key passage from MFNS that one can 
only have "a history of the soul, not a science of the soul". This notion of a 
historical doctrine of the soul is not the trivial idea that the states of the self 
apprehended in inner sense succeed one another in time, but rather is the 
view that the very identity of a mental state is inseparable from its position in 
a (whole) history of mental states. On this view, the categories apply to 
291 

discrete substances in space, but they are inadequate for those items which 
must be conceived historically in this sense. 
The view that mental states are relational is in Husserl, 
[T]hat this perception is inserted in a continuity of perception, but not in an arbitrary one, in 
one wherein constantly "the same object presents itself in a constantly different orientation, 
etc.," that, too, is purely a matter of its essence [all emphasis added] (PRS, p.ll4-115). 
This essential embeddedness of perceptions in a temporally extended process 
of perceiving cannot be explained in causal terms, but is a species of logical 
connection. The logic of the flow of cognitions is the logic of holism, the 
view that cognitions do not, either in their noetic or noematic aspects, occur 
separately, but only in a whole system of cognitions. Referring to the unity 
of the flow of cognitions, Husserl writes, 
Their unity is a unity of synthesis, not merely a continuous connectedness of cognitions (as it 
were, a being stuck to one another externally) (CM, p.41). 
The flow of cognitions in inner sense is not analysed into an series of distinct 
concept-parts (externally stuck together), but displays an internal connect-
edness. On this view, the logic of cognitions and the history of cognitions are 
inseparable (Cf. Husserl's account of the connection between internal time 
and the form of all synthesis (CM, sect. 18)). 
Kant holds that we have no choice but to picture the flow in inner sense 
on analogy with causal connections between distinct existences - but also 
that this analogy is imperfect. His theory of analogical concepts is inherently 
unstable. Fortunately, Kant himself provides the clue to the positive non-
analogical conception of items in inner sense. The causal/mechanical picture, 
which is a mythology when applied to inner sense, has replaced the view that 
the logic of inner sense is the logic of a process. And the logic of the special 
continuity of such a process is captured by temporal-externalism. From 
another angle, the analogical conception of causal connections between 
distinct mental entities is replaced by the conception of connections between 
cognitive items which are intrinsic because those cognitions are not really 
logically distinct from one another. 
Kant's positive account of the continuity of the flow in internal sense is 
the account of a process. The key idea in explicating this notion of process is 
the notion of temporal-externalism. For temporal-externalism yields the 
notion of a process whose logic is internal to it, rather than conferred on it 
from outside, by, for example, an explanation by an underlying mechanism 
(McDonough, 1995a). Thus, the appropriate sort of account for such a 
process is not a causal explanation, but a description of the logic which is 
intrinsic to the phenomena themselves. Part of the real significance of the 
key passage from the Preface to the MFNS is that it anticipates, with respect 
to the flow of cognitions in inner sense, "Goethe's warning", 
Do not, I beg you, look for anything behind the phenomena. They are themselves their own 
lesson [G's emphasis] (quoted in Spengler, Vol. I. p.l56). 
292 

2. The Vitality of the Mental Process 
Even if Kant envisions the notion of the flow of items in inner sense as a 
process in this logically sophisticated sense, what else, if anything, can be 
said about such a process? 
Kant's point is that even if mathematics applies to items in inner sense, it 
cannot be the mathematics of reidentifiable substance. And that means that 
the principles of inner sense cannot be conservation principles. The flow of 
changes in inner sense cannot be conceptualized as mere causal 
rearrangement of the self-same substantial concept-parts. Again, Husserl 
agrees, 
Every spiritual formation, taking the term in its widest possible sense, has its intimate 
structure, its marvelous typology, its wealth of external and internal forms which in the 
stream of spirit-life itself grow and transform themselves, and in [that] transformation again 
cause to come forward differences of structure and type [emphasis added] (PRS, p.l22). 
The same picture of creative mind is repeated in the Crisis (CEM, p.158; and 
see PRS, p.73). The alternative to mechanistic conservation principles are 
'principles' of growth. And how are these conceived? Husserl writes, 
In the visible outer world the structure and typology of organic development afford us exact 
analogies. Therein there are no enduring species and no construction of the same out of 
enduring organic elements (PRS, p.l22). 
Husserl's denial that organic phenomena are composed of repeatable reiden-
tifiable elements derives directly from Kant's denial of substance to items in 
inner sense. And, again employing the Kantian image of the "flow", Husserl 
adds, 
The psychical is ... "vital experience", and vital experience seen in reflection; it appears 
itself through itself as an absolute flow (PRS, p.l 07). 
Indeed, the essential "vitality" of the flow of the psychical in inner sense is, 
perhaps, Husserl's fundamental theme. 
In this respect Husserl is again following Kant who holds that the 
appropriate model for mind is not a machine but an organism (Werkmeister, 
p.149). Of course, Kant's explicit account of organic nature emerges in his 
Critique of Teleological Judgement\ and is not usually associated with his 
account of the flow in inner sense. In fact, however, the unity of the critical 
philosophy requires just this analogy. Kant's denial of scientific status to 
psychology in the Preface to the MFNS, though appearing to be an isolated 
remark, is an integral part of the critical philosophy, bringing together 
themes which trace from the account of the self as a "self-active" being 
(B158 n a) in the Critique of Pure Reason to the organicism of the Critique 
of Judgement. For Kant's denial of scientific status to psychology derives 
from his view, adopted by Husserl, that the self is a vital phenomenon in a 
sense which cannot be captured by the mechanical sciences. 
Though Kant does not himself produce a phenomenology, he stands at the 
beginning of a German 'organicist' tradition whose most fundamental 
293 

intuition, despite vast differences in formulation in different thinkers, is that 
the sort of naturalism based on the mechanical sciences, is intrinsically 
inadequate for the account of life and mind. The general direction of Kant's 
program can be summed up in the following seven theses, 
1.) States of the empirical self must be construed holistically in the sense that the very 
identity of these states is dependent on their relation to a whole set of such states. 
2.) This holism must be conceived temporally, not just spatially, i.e, the identity of states of 
the self is dependent on their relations to other states in a history. 
3.) The account of the empirical self is the account of its successive construction over time-
roughly, the empirical self is not given as a substance but as a process. 
4.) Since the process of construction is, in principle, not completable, the identity of states of 
the self cannot be fixed once and for all. The self never becomes a substance. 
5.) The fact that states of the self cannot have a fixed identity means that there is no 
possibility of causal-mechanical laws which explain the historical development of the self by 
reference to natural (mechanical) conditions. 
6.) Since there is no possibility of natural causal/mechanical explanations of the 
development of the empirical self there is a sense in which the self is free (at least in the 
negative sense of being free from mechanical nature) 
7.) The positive conception of the self is that of a living (organic) phenomenon. The essence 
of vitality is to transfonn itself in ways not forseeable from mechanical nature. 
The first and second of these themes, Kant's holism and historicism, are 
developed by Hegel, Husserl, Heidegger, and others. The third theme, that 
the self is not a substance, like a brain or bone, but a project, is developed in 
various ways by Hegel, Husserl, Heidegger, Sartre, and others. The fourth 
theme, that the state of the self is never definitively fixed prefigures the 
existential-phenomenological themes in Heidegger, Sartre and others, that, as 
Heidegger puts it, "For Dasein there is always something still outstanding." 
(Being and Time, pp.279, 290, 426, etc.). The fifth theme, that one cannot 
explain the historical development of the self as one can that of a mechanism 
prefigures the distinction between explanation and understanding in Dilthey 
and others. The fifth, sixth and seventh conclusions, point towards a notion 
of free self-construction, a fundamental theme in Husserl, Heidegger, and 
Sartre (compare with Heidegger's Metaphysical Foundations of Logic, 
pp.191-192). The seventh thesis, that mind is an organic phenomenon, is 
usually associated with Goethe, Hegel, and Bergson, but, on the present 
interpretation, it can be seen in Kant's account of the flow in inner sense. 
Kitcher's account of the passage in the Preface to Kant's MFNS is, 
therefore, radically wrong. On the surface, Kant gives five reasons why one 
cannot have a science of psychology, and Kitcher deals only with the first of 
these. But her mistake is greater than one of omission. Because of her 
scientistic agenda, she does not get even the first one right. For there is a rich 
internal structure to the passage from the MFNS. And the unifying theme in 
this internal structure is that the category of substance, and therefore the 
other mechanistic categories, do not apply to items in inner sense because the 
294 

soul is a vital phenomenon which must be conceived organically. For 
obvious reasons, this is precisely what cannot be accommodated by the 
mechanistic tradition. 
Kitcher ( 1990b, p.228) holds that Kant's account of cognition is 
philosophically significant because it can be "useful to cognitive science". 
On the contrary, it is not the least of the values of Kant's view that it belongs 
to a distinctive European tradition which has nothing in common with 
contemporary American technological projects. Kant makes his opposition to 
naturalism (Prolegomena, pp.l11-112) and this "soulless materialism" (C1, 
B421) entirely clear. Husserl is following in this Kantian spirit when he 
characterizes such contemporary naturalistic views as "a barbarian hatred of 
spirit" (CEM, p.192) which must be overcome. 
In fact, getting Kant right is especially important in the present scientistic 
age. For example, Fodor, referring to the contemporary mechanistic project 
in cognitive science, writes, 
[I]f we're that wrong about the mind, then we're the wrongest we've ever been about 
anything (1987, p.xii). 
Such remarks, along with the now common views that "the only alternative 
to mechanism is magic" (Churchland, 1986, pp.461-462; McGinn, 1989b, 
pp.362-364; Searle, 1980, p.424, etc.) gives the impression that all "sensible 
people" (Fodor, 1979, p.123) support the project of contemporary 
mechanistic cognitive science. By contrast, Husserl notes that if the sensible 
people are allowed to include the greatest of philosophers, then "the greatest 
minds recoil from this and also from any newer style of psychophysics" 
(CEM, p.183). In the sort of technological age in which one tends to overes-
timate the natural sciences (PRS, p.147), even confusing them with 
philosophy, one must insist that a faithful interpretation of the philosophical 
texts shows that the better part of the great philosophers are not only opposed 
to anything like a cognitive science but are actively engaged in constructing 
an organic alternative to it. 
Indeed, the point is stronger than this. For Kant, with Fichte, Husserl, 
Heidegger and others, belongs to a philosophical tradition, tracing back to 
Socrates, oriented towards the acquisition of self-knowledge - as opposed to 
knowledge of objects. And it is not merely that the other (scientistic-
mechanistic) tradition is oriented to knowledge of objects. For the latter 
(scientistic) tradition is not merely not oriented to knowledge of objects, but 
is positively oriented towards not-knowing the self" It is for this reason that 
the concept of authenticity is so central to the response of the existential-
phenomenological tradition to scientism and mechanism (see McDonough, 
1996). 
The particular irony in the cognitive scientistic interpretation of Kant is 
that Kant initiates the very tradition which wants to explain why we demand 
295 

that there must be a cognitive science, even in the face of its demonstrated 
inability to deal with the phenomenon without distortion. 7 So one may rather 
say that from the perspective of Kant's own European tradition, cognitive 
science is philosophically interesting if only because it illustrates Kant's 
considered view that the demand for a mechanistic account of mind is, like 
the dialectical illusions, just as ineradicable a feature of human reason as it is 
illusory. 
References 
I. Similarly, Dreyfus holds that Kant's notion of mental synthesis is tantamount to the notion 
of a "program providing the rules" for thinking and that this "prepares the ground for a 
model of thinking as data processing" (1993, p.l56). 
2. For example, Stich (1983, p.l4) acknowledges that the usual story about neural explana-
tions of behavior is no more than hopeful science fiction", and confesses to a "nagging 
suspicion that our confidence may be misplaced." See also Fodor (1981, pp.224, 329 n II: 
1985, p.99). In this situation, any ideologically neutral observer will want an explanation 
why such a patently unsuccessful project can retain such popularity. 
3. Just as Kitcher holds that Kant is a forerunner of cognitive science, Dreyfus (1982) holds 
that so too is Husser!. The mistake is the same in both cases. Just because Husser! refers to 
representations, that does not mean that he believes in them in the sense required for 
machine processing (see Mcintyre, 1990). 
4. One might think that this principle is contradicted in modem physics in Heisenberg's idea 
that at the subatomic level the observation of a particle alters its total state (see 
Oppenheimer, p.62). But Heisenberg's notion is not analogous to the one at issue here. 
Whereas, for Heisenberg, the observation of a subatomic particle alters its total state, first, 
it is merely a quantitative alteration, and second, one still gets a probabilistic determination 
of the state of the particle (Cf. Matson, p.l42). This is quite different from Kant's and 
Husserl's point that the observation of a cognitive state qualitatively alters its state. Though 
any example is bound to be controversial, Kant and Husser! are presumably thinking of 
such ideas as that a pain which is perceived to be gone is gone (it is not just located 
indeterminately), that a concept which is perceived to apply in a certain way does apply in 
that way (it is not merely harder to determine how it applies), etc. 
5. Kant writes, "It is indeed quite certain that we cannot adequately cognize, much less 
explain, organized beings and their internal possibility according to mere mechanical 
principles of nature and we can say boldly that it is ... absurd for men ... to hope that 
another Newton will arise who shall make comprehensible to us the production of a blade 
of grass according to natural laws which no design has ordered" (C3, sect 75). 
6. "The majority of men could sooner be brought to believe that they are a piece of lava on 
the moon than to take themselves for a self. Hence they have never understood Kant" 
(Fichte, 1982, p.l62n2). 
7. Heidegger follows Kant in seeking an explanation for this demand: "Dasein is inclined to 
fall back on its world ... and to interpret itself in terms of that world by its reflected light" 
(Being and Time, p.42). If, following the French Enlightenment, Dasein's world is that of 
mechanistic science, then Dasein tends to interpret itself as a machine (McDonough, 
1995b; 1995c; 1996). 
* Kant's first and third Critiques are abbreviated Cl and C3 respectively. Abbreviations of 
Husserl's works are Logical Investigations, Vol. I and Vol. II (L/, I and LI, !I),' ideas(/), 
Cartesian Mediatations (CM), Philosophy as Rigorous Science (PRS), Philosophy and the 
Crisis of European Man (CEM). 
296 

Bibliography 
Churchland, P. 1986. Neurophilosophy. Cambridge: The MIT Press. 
Davidson, D. 1967. "Truth & Meaning" in Synthese. 17. pp.304-323. 
Dreyfus, H. 1982. Husser!, Intentionality, and Cognitive Science. Cambridge, Mass: MIT 
Press/Bradford Books. 
-, 1993. What Computers still can't do. Cambridge: MIT Press. 
Fichte, J.G. 1982. The Science of Knowledge. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Fodor, J. 1979. The Language of Thought. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
-, 1985. "Fodor's Guide to Mental Representation: The Intelligent Man's Vade-Mecum" in 
Mind. 
-, 1987. Psychosemantics. Cambridge: The MIT Press. 
Goldberg, B. 1968. "The Correspondence Hypothesis" in Philosophical Review. 77. pp.438-454. 
Guyer, P. 1987. Kant and the Claims of Knowledge. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
-, 1992a. Introduction to The Cambridge Companion to Kant ed. by P. Guyer. New York: 
Cambridge University Press. 
-, 1992b. "The Transcendental Deduction of the Categories" in The Cambridge Companion to 
Kant ed. by P. Guyer. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Hatfield. G. 1992. "Empirical, rational and transcendental psychology: Psychology as science 
and as philosophy" in The Cambridge Companion to Kant ed. by P. Guyer. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Heidegger, M. 1962. Being and Time. Trans. by Macquarrie and Robinson. New York: Harper 
and Row, Inc. 
-, 1984. Metaphysical Foundations of Logic. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 
Honderich, T. 1988. Mind and Brain: A Theory of Determinism, Vol. I. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Husser!, E. 1965a. "Philosophy as Rigorous Science" in Phenomenology and the Crisis of 
Philosophy. New York: Harper & Row. 
-, 1965b. "Philosophy and the Crisis of European Man" in Phenomenology and the Crisis of 
Philosophy. New York: Harper & Row. 
-, 1970. Cartesian Meditations. Translated by Darien Cairns. The Netherlands: Martinus 
Nijhoff. 
-, 1970. Lagical Investigations, Vol. I. Trans. by John Findlay. New York: The Humanities Press. 
-, 1970. Logical Investigations, Vol. II. Trans. by John Findlay. New York: The Humanities 
Press. 
-, 1975. Ideas. New York: Collier Macmillan. 
Kant, I. 1965. Critique of Pure Reason. Translated by N.K. Smith. New York: StMartin's Press. 
-, 1968. Critique of Judgement. New York: Hafner. 
-, 1950. Prolegomena to any Future Metaphysics. Indianapolis-New York: The Bobbs-Merril 
Company, Inc. 
-, 1970. Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science. Translated by James Ellington. New 
York: The Bobbs-Merrill Co. 
-, 1974. Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View. Translated by Mary Gregor. The 
Hague: Martinus Nijhoff. 
Kitcher, Patricia. 1987. "Discovering the Forms of Intuition" in The Philosophical Review. Vol. 
XCVI. No. 2. pp.205-248. 
-, 1990a. "Kant's Dedicated Cognitive System" in The Historical Foundations of Cognitive 
Science, ed. by J-C. Smith. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Press. pp.l89-210. 
-, 1990b. "Kant's Transcendental Psychology". Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Matson, F.W. 1964. The Broken Image. New York: George Braziller. 
McDonough, R. 1987. "The Phenomenological Foundations of Psychology" in The Idea of a 
Psychological Science, ed. by John Greenwood. Singapore: Singapore University Press. 
1989. "Towards a non-Mechanistic Theory of Meaning" in Mind. XCVIII. No. 389. 
pp.l-21. 
297 

-, 1991. "A Culturalist Account of Folk Psychology" in The Future of Folk Psychology. ed. by 
John Greenwood. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
-, 1995a. "Heidegger, Externalism, Mechanism" in The Journal of the British Society of 
Phenomenology. 
-, 1995b. "Kant's argument against the possibility of cognitive science" in Proceedings of the 
Eighth International Kant Congress. Vol. II. Part I. pp.37-48. 
-, 1995c. "Kant's 'Historicist' Alternative to Cognitive Science" in The Southern Journal of 
Philosophy. 
-, 1995d. "Leibniz's Anti-Mechanistic Account of Mind and Nature" in Idealistic Studies. 
-, 1996. "Heidegger on Kant on the Alternative to the Scientism of the Enlightenment" in 
Journal for the British Society of Phenomenology. 
McGinn, C. 1989a. Mental Content. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 
Mcintyre, R. 1990. "Husser! and the Representational Theory of Mind" in The Historical 
Foundations of Cognitive Science. Ed. by J-C. Smith. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Press. 
pp.211-233. 
Oppenheimer, J .R. 1954. Science and the Common Understanding. New York: Simon and 
Schuster, p.62). 
Putnam, H. 1975. Mind, Language and Reality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
-, 1981. Reason, Truth and History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Rips, L.J. 1990. "Intuitive Psychologists: Mental Activities and their Parts" in The Historical 
Foundations of Cognitive Science, ed. by J-C. Smith. Dordrecht: Kluwer. pp.267-292. 
Russell, B. 1968. "The Philosophy of Logical Atomism" in Logic and Knowledge. Edited by 
Robert Marsh. New York: G.P. Putnam's and Sons. pp.l75-282. 
Schiffer, S. 1989. Remnants of Meaning. Cambridge: The MIT Press. 
Smith, N.K., 1962. A Commentary to Kant's 'Critique of Pure Reason'. New York: Humanities 
Press. 
Spengler, 0. 1926. The Decline of the West, Vol. I. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. 
Stich, S. 1983. From Folk Psychology to Cognitive Science: The Case against Belief. 
Cambridge, Massachussetts. MIT Press. 
Werkmeister, W.H. 1980. Kant: the Architectonic and Development of his Philosophy. La Salle, 
Illinois: Open Court. 
298 

