Philosophical Psychology
ISSN: 0951-5089 (Print) 1465-394X (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/cphp20
Perception beyond Inference
Frank Scalambrino
To cite this article: Frank Scalambrino (2014) Perception beyond Inference, Philosophical
Psychology, 27:5, 764-768, DOI: 10.1080/09515089.2013.773478
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/09515089.2013.773478
Published online: 27 Feb 2013.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 132
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=cphp20

Penke, L., Borsboom, D., Johnson, W., Kievit, R.A., Ploegerand, A., & Wicherts, J.M. (2011).
Evolutionary psychology and intelligence research cannot be integrated the way Kanazawa
(2010) suggests. American Psychologist, 66, 916-917.
Samuels, R., Stich, S., & Bishop, M. (2002). Ending the rationality wars: How to make disputes about
human rationality disappear? In R. Renee (Ed.), Common sense, reasoning and rationality (pp.
236-268). New York: Oxford University Press.
Stanovich, K.E. (1999). Who is rational? Studies of individual differences in reasoning. Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Waksberg, A.J., Smith, A.B., & Burd, M. (2009). Can irrational behavior maximize ﬁtness? Behavioral
Ecology and Sociobiology, 63, 461-471.
Andrea Polonioli
University of Edinburgh, Philosophy
Dugald Stewart Building
3 Charles Street, Edinburgh EH8 9AD, UK
Email: A.Polonioli@sms.ed.ac.uk
q 2013, Andrea Polonioli
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09515089.2013.766166
Perception beyond Inference
Liliana Albertazzi, Gert J. van Tonder, & Dhanraj Vishwanath (Eds.)
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2011
464 pages, ISBN: 0262015021 (hbk); $60.00
Perception beyond inference is an excellent book. The editors are to be commended for
assembling work that so exempliﬁes the fruit of an excellent research project. Because
the book is well written with many helpful illustrations (including color images), its
careful discussion of complex issues regarding perception is not overwhelming.
Generally, the book examines the relation between human perception and the external
environment. Given the relevance of such a point of departure, the book is capable of
speaking to an interdisciplinary audience not limited to philosophy, biosemiotics,
psychology, cognitive science, neuroscience, and artists, and to a variety of interest and
skill levels. Undergraduate readers might struggle at ﬁrst with technical terms such as
'Pra¨gnanz' or 'dynamic space'. However, toward comprehending the more elusive
ideas, readers may start by considering the manner in which the research project
relates to traditional debates regarding perception.
Though the book does not treat the history of its research project as a topic, the focal
topic of the book has an ancient history from at least Aristotle's De anima to the
paradigm shifting moment of Kant's Critique of pure reason. Embracing Kant's
Copernican Revolution, then, the contributors refreshingly stand with Brentano and
the Gestalt school of psychology over the perhaps more common choices today of
Hegel or Husserl. Now, the fundamental problem in traditional debates regarding
764
Book Reviews

perception can be characterized by the question: what is the relation between
perception and the external, i.e., mind-independent, world?
Realists claim that the mind mirrors nature, i.e., the contents of perception
correspond with the reality of the mind-external environment. Yet, there are, of
course, different kinds of realism. To credit the external environment with producing
(as if it were an efﬁcient cause) a perceptual correspondence in the mind is to follow
the empiricist philosophy of Locke. To credit the mind's power of reason, i.e., rational
inference, with producing a perceptual correspondence is to follow the rationalist
philosophy of Descartes. Kant's transcendental philosophy is thought to be
revolutionary, then, in that it suggests that the determination of perceptual contents
neither rests with the sphere of reason nor can be reduced to the external environment.
As an example, consider that simple images can be perceived in different ways (e.g.,
the Necker cube or duck-rabbit) even as one's visual stimulation remains constant. To
perceive the same stimulation differently, i.e., in multiple ways, suggests that the
mind-external entity can be perceived in multiple ways. This is why Kant thought of
perceptual determination as a kind of "limiting" of the mind-external environment.
Recall that for Kant, the mind does not conform to objects, objects conform to the
mind (Kant, 1787/1998, B xvi). And, this understanding should be taken as point of
departure for those who afﬁrm Kant's Copernican revolution, i.e., Brentano and the
Gestalt psychologists.
In Perception beyond inference, this insight is expressed as: "perception in Brentanian
terms is neither the re-presentation of an objective external reality (the inferential
approach) nor is it simply a direct or indirect resonance of such a reality due to action
(Gibson and enactive approaches)" (p. 7). Moreover, it is in the context of this insight
that Koffka's (otherwise radical-sounding) comment from Principles of Gestalt
psychology (1935) should be interpreted: "the physiological ﬁeld is a construct" (p. 69).
For, whereas accounts of perceptual experience prior to Kant, e.g., Descartes and
Locke, assumed a given foundation such as rational inference or a simple physical
external environment to ultimately determine the correspondence of perceptual
experience with mind-external reality, Kant ushers in the idea of a more complex, i.e.,
dynamic, mind-external environment. Hence, realist accounts of perception may be
considered foundationalist insofar as they afﬁrm some version of what anti-
foundationalists label "the Myth of the Given" (Sellars, 1956).
Avowedly, then, the contributors direct the critical edge of the book toward "naı¨ve
realist epistemology," i.e., the notion that perception merely functions to re-present
what is present in the external environment. Here's an analogy: suppose sensation of
the external environment were the matter, then perception would be the form such that
matter and form together would constitute perceptual experience. Now, contrary to
naı¨ve realism, the book supports the idea that "we don't 'react' to a sensory input so
much as we react to the meaning of the information before us" (p. 1). Whereas the
naı¨ve realist relies on the method of inference to reason that the matter is foundational
and that perception functions as the mirror of nature, the contributors to this book
work beyond inference such that their "linking theme is the foundational role of
perception" (p. vii). By having a foundational role, perception functions as an anti-
Book Reviews
765

foundation for experience in that from such a foundation, the power of inference
cannot make the mind-external world transparent to the discursivity of mind; this is
how the Kant/Brentano/Gestalt approach overcomes the Myth of the Given. Hence,
the contributors are concerned to understand "the information content" of perception
by examining the formal constraints and tendencies of perceptual experience.
The organization of the book follows what may be called "the trajectory of the
structure of experience," i.e., from concrete to abstract levels of signiﬁcation pertaining
to the function of perception. Beyond the preface and acknowledgements, the book is
divided into ﬁve sections. In the "Introduction" section, the editors provide an
overview of the chapters contributed and, while orienting the reader to the book's
organization, take the opportunity to introduce the research project exempliﬁed by
the work. In accordance with the book's subtitle, Koenderink (chapter 1) introduces
the reader to "the essentials of a perception-centric theory of vision" (p. 17). The next
section, "Time and Dynamics," deploys four chapters to criticize the naı¨ve realist belief
in the Myth of the Given, while alternatively pointing to an understanding of
perceptual primitives that is informed by Brentanian and Gestalt psychology. This
section highlights the importance and centrality of the notions of dynamic space and
Pra¨gnanz.
Consider how, were you to see a wet foot print in your home, you would infer
information about spaces and times other than the space and the time of seeing the
wet footprint. Now, analogously to the above example, transpose this into a
description of dynamic space beyond inference by thinking of perceptual primitives as
doing the work that inference does in the footprint example. In other words, an aspect
of the environment isolated through perceptual experience contains properties salient
for the determination of meaning beyond the particular spatiotemporally isolated
aspect of the environment. So, ﬁrst, to account for the presence of meaning regarding
non-present aspects of the environment, the process of meaning-making takes place
on the side of the structure of experience, not in external space. Second, space can now
be thought of as capable of sustaining multiple interpretations, i.e., space as dynamic.
Pra¨gnanz clariﬁes this further.
Pra¨gnanz refers to the laws governing the structural qualities of the automaticity
involved in spontaneous and immediate perceptual experience, i.e., "a bias to interpret
a stimulus to be as regular, simple, and symmetrical as possible" (p. 76). On the one
hand, Pra¨gnanz seeks to enunciate laws regarding meaning-making in perceptual
experience. On the other hand, the presence of Pra¨gnanz indicates the possibility of
irregular, complex, and asymmetrical interpretations of stimuli. Hence, dynamic space
and Pra¨gnanz may be seen to speciﬁcally critique the Myth of the Given and naı¨ve
realism, i.e., (spatial) perception does not mirror (spatial) nature, from within the
Kant/Brentano/Gestalt approach.
For Kova´cs, then, (chapter 2) as for Brentano: "higher levels of organization might
not be understood purely by accounting for the elements—organizational rules
between these elements need to be discovered" (p. 72). For Hubbard (chapter 3),
Pra¨gnanz makes sense here as "decreasing processing demands and increasing
cognitive efﬁciency" (p. 97). In fact, for van Tonder (chapter 4), "visual experience and
766
Book Reviews

information content are already embodied in the peculiar way that the stimulus ﬂux is
processed and encoded as early as the retina" (p. 18). Shimojo (chapter 5) adds that
"the perceptual processing in the sensory cortices" emerge "as quick, self-organizing
processing designed to generate an unambiguous percept from sensory inputs . . .
independent of explicit knowledge" (p. 153).
In the next section, "Color, Shape, and Space," Mausfeld (chapter 6) explores
phenomena "pertaining to the perception of material appearances . . . particularly
suited to expose the explanatory gap between the information available in the sensory
input and the meaningful categories that characterize the output of the perceptual
system" (p. 159). Vishwanath explores the manner in which pictures "present a
window into the interpretive and constructive capacity of the human visual system"
(p. 201). Ben-Shahar and Zucker (chapter 8) discuss the aspects of perceptual
organization from Gestalt psychology toward a "biologically plausible computational
framework," i.e., a coherent account that includes "perceptual experience,
computation, and neural organization" (p. 19). Pinna (chapter 9) advocates for a
"reassessment" using an alternative account in theories correlating neural activity with
"how and why the visual system segregates objects with a particular shape, color, and
depth stratiﬁcation" (p. 261).
In the penultimate section, "Language and Perception," Pinna and Albertazzi
(chapter 10) propose a "foundation of meaning on a perceptual basis" (p. 287), i.e.,
they suggest a continuum among what they take to be the three forms of organization
necessary for perception, "showing how perceptual meaning is an emergent result
spontaneously conveyed by vision" (p. 20). And, Albertazzi (chapter 11) analyzes
metaphor from a "Gestalt point of view" (p. 374) to advocate for a direct analogy
between "phenomenal and conceptual ﬁlling" (p. 375), i.e., ﬁgure completion illusions
(e.g., Kanizsa's triangle) and the content of a poem taken as a whole.
In the concluding section, "Perception in Art, Design, and Computation," Ione
(chapter 12) examines the relation between the work of Paul Ce´zanne and Pra¨gnanz.
Presenting Ce´zanne as a philosopher of perception, Ione explains that
even if we say that individual percepts already contain abstract content and allow
that a work of art can be called the abstracted solution to an artistic problem, there is
still a need to grapple with the relationship between the abstract information and the
practice that gives it form
. . .
[a] focused intuition [that] seems to defy
quantiﬁcation. (p. 405)
Finally, Edmonds (chapter 13) reminds us that "an object can be considered to have
information content even when we have no direct way of knowing what that
information means" (p. 411). Beyond inference, "generative art" illustrates the
production of "new information" produced through the application of—think Gestalt
Pra¨gnanz here—rules such that "the act of looking at visual art may be seen as an act of
information discovery" (p. 415).
This book is published by the MIT Press, and that the book can speak to a range of
interest levels and knowledge bases means that the book will interest experts; yet, it
also means that it can function as a resource for the clariﬁcation and advancement of
Book Reviews
767

an excellent research project. The criticism of naı¨ve realism seems to require an
authentic will to examine the science, the phenomenology, and the art, so that we
might perceive the meaning of the mystery of experience. The contributors to
Perception beyond inference have constructed a much needed resource to advance the
understanding of perceptual experience in itself and as a point of departure for further
development.
References
Kant, I. (1998). Critique of pure reason (P. Guyer & A. W. Wood, Trans.). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. (Original work published 1787).
Koffka, K. (1935). Principles of Gestalt psychology. New York: Harcourt Brace and Company.
Sellars, W. (1956). Empiricism and the philosophy of mind. In H. Feigl & M. Scriven (Eds.),
Minnesota studies in the philosophy of science (Vol. 1, pp. 253-329). Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press.
Frank Scalambrino
The Chicago School of Professional Psychology
Clinical Psychology
325 North Wells Street
Chicago, IL 60654, USA
Email: fscalambrino@thechicagoschool.edu
q 2013, Frank Scalambrino
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09515089.2013.773478
Modes of Creativity: Philosophical Perspectives
Irving Singer
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2011
328 pages, ISBN: 0262014920 (hbk); $36.00
In Modes of creativity, MIT philosopher Irving Singer examines creativity, taking
(as he dubs it) the pluralistic approach. Singer focuses upon "the diversity of types of
creativity and the alternate ways in which it appears in our species, across and within
all the arts and sciences, and throughout the ordinary living of life as we know it"
(p. xi). Despite his ambitious aims, he sadly omits recent ﬁndings in cognitive science,
neurobiology, and psychology in general while offering his reﬂections, which he claims
are aimed at both amplifying and fortifying these types of research by "aligning them
to the aesthetic, affective, and phenomenological framework of experiential behavior
that permeates the human quest for meaning" (p. xi). As such, presaging his later
references to the tradition of continental philosophy, Singer describes this human
768
Book Reviews

