Textual Practice
ISSN: 0950-236X (Print) 1470-1308 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rtpr20
'The immanent logic of human experience':
Reading Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit after
Lacan's 'Logical Time' essay
Robert Stark
To cite this article: Robert Stark (2013) 'The immanent logic of human experience': Reading
Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit after Lacan's 'Logical Time' essay, Textual Practice, 27:7,
1149-1175, DOI: 10.1080/0950236X.2012.715590
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/0950236X.2012.715590
Published online: 20 Sep 2012.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 714
View related articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rtpr20

Robert Stark
'The immanent logic of human experience': Reading Hegel's
Phenomenology of Spirit after Lacan's 'Logical Time' essay
The progression of Consciousness in Hegel's Phenomenology is usually
understood as either a logical (McTaggart) or temporal (Marx) succession.
Beginning in the twentieth century, phenomenological readings (Merleau-
Ponty) have sought to reconcile these two competing data. Lacan's 'Logical
Time and the Assertion of Anticipated Certainty: A New Sophism' may be
read as a response to Hegel's dialectic in this tradition. It describes in alle-
gorical form the progression of Consciousness through three distinct
rational phases that correspond to the most basic phases of Hegel's dialec-
tic. Crucially, this succession depends on strictly irrational elements.
Doubt, and its manifestation in the momentary hesitation of the subject,
proves instrumental in the emergence of identity and takes on a positive
rational value. Lacan's concept of Logical Time synthesizes the equally
important imperatives of Logic and Time that alone permit the emergence
of a fully adaptive reason, and the higher forms of Consciousness that are
predicated upon it.
Keywords
Jacques Lacan; G.W.F. Hegel; phenomenology; time; logic
Textual Practice, 2013
Vol. 27, No. 7, 1149-1175, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0950236X.2012.715590
# 2013 Taylor & Francis

In Chapter 5 of Studies in the Hegelian Dialectic, J.M.E. McTaggart1
reduces Hegel's entire dialectic to the basic claim that the world is
fundamentally rational: that, given sufﬁciently reﬁned notional apparatus
(i.e. the Hegelian 'we', the agency of the philosopher) the world ultimately
makes sense, even in its most nuanced, slightest manifestations. To this he
opposes the view that the world is fundamentally irrational: that the con-
tinued existence of disorder sufﬁces to frustrate and ultimately refute any
attempt to comprehensively impose reason upon the world. To accept
one of these claims, McTaggart holds, is to reject the other. And yet he
can ﬁnd no reason to reject either premise: Hegel's dialectic in The Phe-
nomenology of Spirit2 admits no logical error, but neither is there any
logical basis for dismissing the claim that the sure presence of the incom-
prehensible in our lives forever threatens to obliterate our whole attempt at
systematic knowledge. While the details of McTaggart's study must here
remain tacit, his conclusions are pressing: the thinker must accept both
contradictories, thinking thereby to obtain, under however unsatisfactory
a form, the fullest measure he is at present able to grasp.3 Doing so:
The two contrary propositions - that the world was fundamentally
perfect, and that imperfection did exist - would be harmonized and
reconciled by a synthesis, in the same way that the contradictions
within the dialectic itself are overcome. The two sides of the opposi-
tion would not so much be both false as both true. They would be
taken up into a higher sphere where the truth of both would be
preserved.4
In short, what McTaggart calls for is a Hegelianism that would permit one
further synthesis. The Phenomenology of Spirit, McTaggart argues, needs to
be brought into conjunction with the possibility of the ubiquitous failure
of (its) logic to be properly understood. Foucault5 has the same synthesis in
mind when he states that: 'we must determine the extent to which our anti-
Hegelianism is possibly one of his tricks directed against us, at the end of
which he stands, motionless, waiting for us'.6
The pursuit of this elusive synthesis, which even the most sanguine of
Hegelians are loath to admit, will be the task of this essay. By answering
Foucault's query in the afﬁrmative - by suggesting that the logical
matrix of The Phenomenology exceeds conventional interpretative strategy
in calling for a dialectical understanding of reason itself, and not merely
scholarly agreement or disagreement on what is reasoned thereby - I
propose to show that Hegel preempts McTaggart's gambit, incorporating
within the discursive framework of The Phenomenology the possibility of a
meltdown in this very framework.7 To make this claim I will utilize a her-
meneutic strategy in keeping with the dialectical understanding I am trying
Textual Practice
1150

to advance by offering a parallel. Jacques Lacan8 presents a paradigm of
interpretation equal to the task before us in his essay 'Logical Time and
the Assertion of Anticipated Certainty: A New Sophism' - his 'Logical
Time' construct facilitates the unreserved and responsible Hegelianism
that McTaggart calls for. Examining Lacan's essay permits an appreciation
of a crucial aspect of the Phenomenology of Spirit that has seldom received
the attention it deserves, namely, that Hegel's Reason takes account of the
possibility of the failure of reason per se.
But is the synthesis offered by Lacan's text the same as that which
McTaggart anticipates? He begins his crucial ﬁfth chapter with the follow-
ing assertion:
The succession of categories in Hegel's Logic is, of course, not pri-
marily a temporal succession. We pass from one moment to
another because the admission of the ﬁrst as valid requires logically
the admission of the second as valid.9
We are faced, initially, with a dichotomy: according to McTaggart, either
the development of Hegel's thought is logical, or else it is temporal, as,
indeed, the title of his chapter, 'The Relation of the Dialectic to Time',
must lead us to expect. In The Phenomenology, therefore, Spirit is either
revealed more or less instantly, as a logical resultant of the premises
granted by Sense-certainty, in which case the time it takes to actually
read the text is an unavoidable distraction, or else it is revealed gradually,
its quality issuing directly out of the time it takes to unfold, maturing like a
good whisky, in which case the self-evidence of its logic is less important
than the education that permits the individual to recognize it. McTaggart
goes on to qualify his own uncompromising stance on the matter by reject-
ing the temporal view on strictly logical grounds. He contends that 'such a
. . . [temporal] . . . view is incompatible with the system . . . the theory that
time is the ultimate reality would lead to insoluble difﬁculties as to the
commencement of the system', and that
the Absolute Idea must be held to be the presupposition of the logical
prius of the lower categories. It follows that a theory which makes the
appearance of the lower category the presupposition of the appear-
ance of the higher one cannot fully represent the ultimate reality
of the process.10
We may perhaps ignore the question of the legitimacy of this operation -
that is, proving the primacy of a logical interpretation over a temporal
interpretation by ﬁrst assuming that the logical has precedence - after
all, whether we accept his reasoning or not we defer the question of
Robert Stark The immanent logic of human experience
1151

logic and time to a question of rationality and irrationality. If held to be
legitimate, the logical/temporal dichotomy resolves itself to be equivalent
to a rational/irrational dichotomy, since one aspect of the initial dichotomy
(the logical) is revered for its apparent rationality and the other (the tem-
poral aspect) rejected since it does not stand to reason; if deemed illegiti-
mate, on the other hand, this conclusion presses all the more, since the
reason we would not admit the operation is precisely because we refuse
to commit the temporal to an a priori organon in the ﬁrst place, as does
McTaggart. Indeed, by 'rational' we must understand that which we
may satisfactorily defer to an already given reason, that which proceeds
in accordance with certain a priori (and therefore a-temporal) rules govern-
ing decision-making, and by 'irrational' that which deﬁes these rules, and
which changes with time. So, while the tenor of McTaggart's discussion, in
focusing upon the rational and the irrational, might appear to be discrete
from any discussion of logic and time, this is evidently not so. The problem
of arriving at a synthesis of the rational and the irrational becomes
embroiled in the prospect of achieving a synthesis of the logical and the
temporal. The two are equivalent.
Far from obfuscating the problem, this allows a contextualization of
the central question, and a move towards the anticipated synthesis. It is,
I hope, not too much of a reduction to speak of two fundamental trends
in interpretation of The Phenomenology: there are those who, like McTag-
gart, emphasize the logical movement of its categories, and there are those
who emphasize the progression of its moments in time. Despite McTag-
gart's 'of course', the decision most critics perceive to be requisite is not
to be taken lightly.11 Of those who emphasize the perceived temporal pro-
gression in The Phenomenology, I would single out Marx as exemplary. The
following passage is typical:
In the actual world private right, morality, the family, civil society,
the state etc., remain in existence, only they have become moments
of man - state of his existence and being - which have no validity
in isolation, but dissolve and engender one another, etc. They have
become moments of motion.12
In deferring to Hegel primarily for a comparative socio-historical analysis,
Marx emphasizes the progression, in time, of one form of 'existence and
being' to the other. His analysis (and revolutionary aspirations) rest, in
no small part, on the necessity of this progression. The reader will note,
however, that no simple progression is here being proposed. The
'moments' Marx alludes to are forces, elements that together comprise
something larger and more signiﬁcant, in relation to which they are
either of little importance, or else convenient abstractions, like the
Textual Practice
1152

vectors an engineer will resolve a complex structure into for the ease of
mathematical manipulation, or foresight. The whole, that is to say the
Hegelian Absolute, is what establishes the 'validity' of the progression of
moments and gives it life and meaning. Sergei Eisenstein arguably provides
the most tangible illustration of this reading of Hegel in his attempt to
create a uniquely Soviet cinema by pioneering 'dialectical montage' - of
which Gilles Deleuze13 writes:
It is a totality which has become concrete or existing, in which the
parts are produced by each other in their sets and the set is repro-
duced in the parts, so that this reciprocal causality refers back to
the whole as cause of the set and of its parts . . . dialectical reality con-
stantly produces itself and grows.14
To focus upon the temporal dimension of The Phenomenology of Spirit is
therefore not to propose that the dialectic is of necessity a closed
economy or an inert chain of linear causation; it is, instead, to elevate
the status of the dialectic to that of a continuum or multiplicity; to con-
struct a datum on which meaning and truth take hold gradually and
reality is, of necessity, reﬁgured and reconstituted in permutations as limit-
less as the series of time it is predicated upon. Deleuze cogently summerizes
the central tenet of this approach: reality is itself reckoned to be dialectical.
The whole and the parts are engaged in a 'reciprocal causality' that will not
suffer an a-priori logic.
In casting the argument thus, we immediately glimpse how Marx and
Eisenstein's conception of the dialectic have implications for the Absolute,
and Hegel's project more generally, which Marx's theories do not ade-
quately legislate for. The dialectical relationship between the sequence of
moments and the Absolute would seem to preclude any realization of
the Absolute except as the foil of the speciﬁc; that which gives the
moment its unique character while remaining itself unarticulated. What
is more, it would seem inevitable on this view - in the absence of a
ﬁnite temporal series, since time has not, in fact, come to an end - that
the Absolute is itself a changing and not a constant ﬁgure. It has often
been suggested that Hegel claims to have realized an Absolute state, that
The Phenomenology is demonstrably written from such a perspective, and
that this undermines his entire project rather comically. These reservations
require a short-sighted and un-Hegelian account of the Absolute, conceiv-
ing of it as a static rather than dynamic, dialectical construct. As Zˇizˇek
reminds us, 'we fail to grasp the Absolute precisely in so far as we continue
to presuppose that, above and beyond the domain of our ﬁnitely reﬂected
reasoning, there is an Absolute to be grasped'.15 If we continue to assume
that the Absolute must be either internal to the whole system or suspended
Robert Stark The immanent logic of human experience
1153

over and above as the external and unknowable Real, we are destined to rob
it of its dialectical subtlety whichever way we negotiate the question.
Instead, we must start with the conjunction of the Absolute and our
'ﬁnitely reﬂected reasoning', and acknowledge that such a relationship
fully admits neither internality nor externality, but rather continuing dia-
lectical exchange. Thus conceived, the Absolute is the limit of the phenom-
enological moment, its undoing, but equally its self-reﬂection. To restate a
useful formulation: the Absolute becomes the foil of the speciﬁc.
However, if neither the strictly logical (e.g. McTaggart) nor the
strictly temporal reading (e.g. Marx) of The Phenomenology fully satisﬁes,
there is a third option, which I will pursue in the following pages.
Merleau-Ponty is perhaps typical of those who would claim existential or
phenomenological readings of Hegel. He claims:
What is certain in any case is that the Phenomenologie de l'esprit does
not try to ﬁt all history into a framework of pre-established logic but
attempts to bring each doctrine and each era back to life and to let
itself be guided by their internal logic with such impartiality that
all concern with system seems forgotten . . . It is in this sense that
one can speak of 'Hegelian existentialism' since he does not
propose to connect concepts but to reveal the immanent logic of
human experience in all its sectors.16
In what Merleau-Ponty calls 'the immanent logic of human experience',
temporal progression is reduced to the moment in its sensual immediacy,
logical progression is reduced to only its most exigent contingencies, and
both are ultimately accommodated. This view facilitates an understanding
of the logical vicissitudes of history without validating the narrative or
order that history assigns to them. An understanding of time does persist
in this reading, but a rather different understanding than before. As
Merleau-Ponty's decisive last sentence makes clear, what he regards as essen-
tial in the movement of time is no longer held to be the succession of
moments, but, in fact, their secession. To the extent that this analysis
refuses to admit causation in the usual sense - that is in the non-Hegelian
sense; in the sense that assumes difference to be external to the two 'different'
terms - it may be called a-temporal, synchronic, even spatial in its under-
standing.17 Moments take on a certain autonomy; they become several, dis-
crete, capricious; they become a torment to the torrent of history.
Thus in The Phenomenology we have a notorious chapter on phrenol-
ogy, and Hegel's infamous account of the Spirit as a bone. It would seem to
be self-evident, from the perspective afforded by today's sensibility, that the
intellectual value of phrenology, physiognomy, etc. is minimal. But to state
that phrenology's inﬂuence is limited to the curiosity it aroused in ﬁgures
Textual Practice
1154

like Hegel, Keats, or Foucault is to miss Hegel's point that all of history is
composed of precisely such curiosities. History has itself become discon-
tinuous: qualitatively and not merely quantitatively different from itself
in its unfolding (more of which shortly). On this mode of understanding,
Hegel's formulation that 'the Spirit is a bone' is interesting: (1) (Thesis)
precisely insofar as it marks the idiosyncratic and irreducible logic of the
only period that could have produced it; (2) (Antithesis) is ostensibly irre-
concilable with the wisdom of the day, or is irrational, and (3) (Synthesis)
maintains an inherent philosophical value in spite of (¼because of) this
paradox. Hyppolite18 provides an accurate estimate of this value:
in contrast to its apparent absurdity . . . [the statement 'the Spirit is a
bone'] . . . sets forth the truth of idealism: the identity of thought and
being. But this identity must be taken as a concept and not as a por-
trayal . . .' (meaning, I think, what Hegel calls 'picture-thinking').19
This is as fecund an example of the process of Aufhebung as we are likely to
ﬁnd: the synthesis of reason and the (material, irrational) externalization it
hopes to ﬁnd manifest in the world at large. The 'concept' active here is the
complex identity of the mind and the world that Hegel vies with throughout
The Phenomenology. Being, for Hegel, is an extension of thought, and thought
an extension of being. The two exist in a cruel, often ironic, symbiosis:
The knowing 'I', still ﬁnds in the Predicate what it thought it had
ﬁnished with and got away from, and from which it hoped to
return to itself; and, instead of being able to function as the deter-
mining agent in the movement of the predication, arguing back
and forth whether to attach this or that Predicate, it is really still
with the self of the content, having to remain associated with it.20
As Zˇizˇek declares, the subject suffers 'the revenge of the substance'.21
From McTaggart, then, we retain the sentiment that a formal syn-
thesis is yet required to make fuller sense of the Phenomenology of Spirit,
and we have seen how the synthesis that McTaggart looked for implicates
the history of Hegelian scholarship, and intercepts its trajectory. But
McTaggart's commitment to logical primacy prevents him from realizing
the synthesis he seeks. He argues that
The dialectic process, even if we suppose it to take place in time, is
not a mere succession in time, but essentially a logical process [. . .]
It is clear that it would be impossible, by consideration of the
nature of a logical category, to deduce the conclusion that for
Robert Stark The immanent logic of human experience
1155

some time it could exist independently, but that, after that, its imper-
fection would drive it on to another stage.22
Even if the ﬁrst part of this statement is held to be fairly consistent with the
phenomenological/existential reading exempliﬁed by Mereau-Ponty, the
second part is clearly, and rather jarringly at odds with it. McTaggart
assumes that 'the nature of a logical category' prevents it from eliciting
ﬁrst one consequence and then another, which he supposes would be a
characteristic trait of the argument were we to privilege time over logic
in the interpretation of The Phenomenology of Spirit. We are, however,
obliged to recognize that a certain caprice is as typical a feature of the Hege-
lian dialectic as the inevitability of its logical unfolding. McTaggart is no
more correct in privileging logic than is Marx in privileging time. For
Hegel,
knowledge makes its appearance . . . [on] . . . the path of the natural
consciousness which presses forward to true knowledge; or as the
way of the Soul which journeys through the series of its own con-
ﬁgurations as though they were stations appointed for it by its
own nature.23
The 'journey' metaphor, a recurrent one for Hegel, has a clearly temporal
as well as a spatial signiﬁcance. One may almost read The Phenomenology as
a guide-book taking a philosophically minded tourist beyond the local,
indigenous knowledge of Sense-certainty to the more exotic climes of
Spirit, Religion, Art, etc. Hegel's dialectic consists of a progression of
clearly demarked phases - almost topographical in their differences -
that do not immediately collapse into the next. Not only do these
'shapes' endure temporarily, but they also persist as authentic and mean-
ingful formations that recur and are later revisited.24 The rhythm of the
dialectic is interrupted by moments of relative quietude:
Spirit is indeed never at rest but always engaged in moving forward.
But just as the ﬁrst breath drawn by a child after its long, quiet nour-
ishment breaks the gradualness of merely quantitative growth - there
is a qualitative leap and the child is born - so likewise the Spirit in its
formation matures slowly and quietly into its new shape, dissolving
bit by bit the structure of its previous world, whose tottering state is
only hinted at by isolated symptoms. The frivolity and boredom
which unsettle the established order, the vague foreboding of some-
thing unknown, these are the heralds of approaching change. The
gradual crumbling that left unaltered the face of the whole is cut
Textual Practice
1156

short by a sunburst which, in one ﬂash, illuminates the features of the
new world.25
This is Hegel at his most poetic, and for good reason. The distinction he
invokes is a crucial one if we are to understand the development of The
Phenomenology as the essentially confused development it is: on the one
hand, there is the continual sedentary toil of our thought to understand
the world around us; on the other hand, there are seismic shifts, speculative
insights that so radicalize our thought that they change the world by dra-
matically altering our understanding of its constitution or our role in it. It
is primarily these latter qualitative developments that are of consequence in
The Phenomenology, although Hegel minutely exposes the quantitative
steps to a developed consciousness, particularly in the ﬁrst half of the
text. If the quantitative ruminations of reason are unending, the qualitative
leaps that constitute true progress are only isolated incidences. The logical
'perfection' McTaggart posits fails to take into account this crucial distinc-
tion: the dialectic is indeed punctuated by periods of logical surrender
where the iteration of reason seems inertly suspended, where we progress
quantitatively, not qualitatively, where we labour with all our rational
effort but fail to accomplish more than modest understanding. Signiﬁ-
cantly, this feeling is a familiar experience for the student of Hegel: the
comprehension that a study of The Phenomenology would instil must be
qualitative as well as quantitative; we must be capable of following
Hegel's logic in minute detail as well as appreciating the frequent epistemic
shifts in this logic, as between Consciousness and Self-consciousness, or
Reason and Spirit.
It cannot escape our attention that, again, logic and time, as reason and
the unreasonable, appear confounded. In McTaggart's analysis, the logical
imperative was incommensurate with the display of caprice we witness in
Hegel. This is his cardinal error. To redress the problem, to legislate for
all that we ﬁnd in the dialectical processes of The Phenomenology, we must
either reﬁne the nature of the logical operation itself, or else allow the
subject of any logical operation to be nascent. We must introduce the
irrational to the rational, and acknowledge both as equally indubitable
aspects of reason.
This realization has been a crux of phenomenological and existential-
ist readings of Hegel from the outset. For Merleau-Ponty, for example,
All the great philosophical ideas of the past century - the philos-
ophies of Marx and Nietzsche, phenomenology, German existential-
ism, and psychoanalysis - had their beginnings in Hegel; it was he
who attempted to explore the irrational and integrate it into an
expanded reason which remains the task of our century. He is the
Robert Stark The immanent logic of human experience
1157

inventor of that Reason, broader than understanding, which can
respect the variety and singularity of individual consciousnesses, civi-
lizations, ways of thinking, and historical contingency but which
nevertheless does not give up the attempt to master them.26
A coherent account of precisely how the synthesis of reason and the
irrational is to be explained or utilized has not been so forthcoming.
What is wanting is a conception of logic that already incorporates time,
and a concept of time that dialectically implicates logic. Hegel says as
much:
This absolute truth of ﬁxed determinateness, or of a number of
different Laws, contradicts . . . the unity . . . of thought and form in
general. What is asserted to be a ﬁxed law that is in itself constant
can only be a moment of the unity which is reﬂected into itself,
can only appear as a vanishing magnitude. But, torn out of this
context of movement in the course of considering them . . . these
laws are not the truth of thought.27
Moreover, the reason Hegel rejects the idea of a set of ready-made laws is
not because there is some inadequacy in the sort of knowledge they can
provide (for example, a purely formal knowledge as to the order and
arrangement of things, without the speciﬁc apprehension of precisely
what is ordered or arranged). On the contrary, the reason these laws are
inadequate is precisely the opposite: it is not the form of knowledge they
provide but the content that is lacking. Any formulation of law is merely
an absent-minded generalization of an immediate and tangible truth, a for-
getting of very speciﬁc claims, and the existent conditions that present these
claims as knowable:
In their truth, as vanishing moments in the unity of thought, they
would have to be taken as a knowing, or as a movement of
thought, but not as Laws of being.28
So, when faced with the alternatives of formally reﬁning the logical appar-
atus or restricting their application to the individual moments at which
they make their appearance, it would appear that Hegel favours the
latter option. If, for Marx, logical reason is the 'mind's coin of the
realm', it is certainly not so for Hegel, as he tells us directly: 'the truth is
not a minted coin that can be given and pocketed ready-made'.29 A suc-
cessful logic must appeal directly to the moment from which it draws its
veracity; there is no guarantee that logic can transcend mere observation
except by accounting for the fact that it is itself as nascent as the object
Textual Practice
1158

it encounters. Hegel insists upon this from the beginning of The Phenom-
enology, objecting that 'Reason is [. . .] misunderstood when reﬂection is
excluded from the True'.30 This truth is reﬂected in the rhetorical strategy
of The Phenomenology, as well as the notion of bildung that pervades it.
Each stage in the historical education of Consciousness is privy to an
exclusive philosophical value that can only be apprehended by a subject
who is willing to stake his entire existence on what is directly before him
though it jars with whatever knowledge he has already accumulated.
Therein, the in itself becomes for itself. It is thus that we must understand
his avowal of the spirit as a bone, as a 'concept' and not as a 'portrayal', in
Hyppolite's aforementioned terms.
In our search for a synthesis of the rational and the irrational, and of
the logical and the temporal, then, we are faced with the task of 'running
together what thought has put asunder'.31 Evidently, what thought has put
asunder is thought itself. We are faced, in short, with the task of reconsti-
tuting what we might call Hegel's meta-logic, with reconstructing the
method by which the Hegelian subject is led to the extra-logical apprehen-
sion of logic's discontinuous continuity. This is perhaps the fullest
meaning of what Hegel calls Speculative Thought. Thought must be
made capable of the qualitative leap as well as quantitative toil if 'substance'
is to become 'subject'.32 It is here that we realize a responsibility beyond the
passive apprehension of sense data and the mere implementation of logical
axiom; it is here that Spirit is actualized.
On the subject of Speculative Thought, Hegel's language, not surpris-
ingly, tends to be at its most speculative: we are to travel 'the way of doubt',
acquiesce in an 'immediacy which barely is', be capable of 'looking the
negative in the face, and tarrying with it'.33 It is clear that an understanding
of the meta-logic he alludes to will require more than even the most con-
certed attempts at paraphrase. His clauses are, after all, not to be under-
stood as mere predicates whose enumeration will eventually confer the
subject in its full essence; similarly, the examples he provides are not to
be understood to accrete in such a way as to eventually surrender the
whole of Spirit, or the Absolute, or, for that matter, any subject, but to
present their subject directly, immediately, and fully with each breath:
The proposition should express what the True is; but essentially the
True is the Subject. As such it is merely the dialectical movement,
this course that generates itself, going forth from, and returning to,
itself.34
We require an interpretative framework that will accommodate both of
these features of Hegelian rhetoric - the identity of the true and the
subject, as well as the dialectic by which this becomes possible - but
Robert Stark The immanent logic of human experience
1159

that will allow for a more explicit understanding of how and why they are
so important. Lacan's essay, 'Logical Time and the Assertion of Anticipated
Certainty: A New Sophism' provides just this. I therefore propose to
outline the extent to which Lacan's article can be understood as a rendering
of the Hegelian dialectic, and how his 'Logical Time' construct proves
equal to the task that this analysis clearly demands, namely, synthesizing
the logical and the temporal, the rational and the irrational.35
Dialectics: the topographical basis of the comparison
Lacan asks his readers to follow him as he undertakes to resolve a hypothe-
tical dilemma in his essay, much the way Hegel asks us to follow him as he
relates to us the development (historical or logical, depending on who you
talk to) of Consciousness. The dilemma is this:
A prison warden has three select prisoners summoned and announces
to them the following:
For reasons I need not make known now, gentlemen, I must set
one of you free. In order to decide whom, I will entrust the
outcome to a test which you will kindly undergo.
There are three of you present. I have here ﬁve discs differing only
in color: three white and two black. Without letting you know which
I have chosen, I shall fasten one of them to each of you between his
shoulders; outside, that is, your direct visual ﬁeld - any indirect ways
of getting a look at the disc being excluded by the absence here of any
means of mirroring.
At that point, you will be left at your leisure to consider your com-
panions and their respective discs, without being allowed, of course,
to communicate amongst yourselves the results of your inspection.
Your own interest would, in any case, proscribe such communi-
cation, for the ﬁrst to be able to deduce his own color will be the
one to beneﬁt from the dispensatory measure at our disposal.
His conclusion, moreover, must be founded upon logical and not
simply probabilistic reasons. Keeping this in mind, it is to be under-
stood that as soon as one of you is ready to formulate such a con-
clusion, he should pass through this door so that he may be
judged individually on the basis of his response.
This having been made clear, each of the three subjects is adorned
with a white disc, no use being made of the black ones, of which there
were, let us recall, but two.
How can the subjects solve the problem?36
Textual Practice
1160

What is perhaps most unmistakably Hegelian about 'Logical Time and the
Assertion of Anticipated Certainty: A New Sophism' is the tripartite rhe-
torical structure of the solution, the movement of which corresponds
with alacrity to the basic dialectic of Consciousness, Self-consciousness,
and Reason evinced by Hegel in the ﬁrst half of the Phenomenology.37 As
they ﬁrst begin to comprehend their situation, Lacan's prisoners face a
largely empirical problem; the terms of the experiment having been
explained, the solution must divulge itself within the parameters of the
experiment:
Being opposite two blacks, one knows that one is white. We have here a
logical exclusion which gives the movement its basis . . . Expressing it
in the form two blacks :: one white, we see the instantaneousness of its
evidence.38
The prospect of a solution is contrived in the artiﬁce of the problem itself.
Hegel's methodological dictum at the start of the Consciousness chapter of
The Phenomenology serves usefully as an opening caveat for Lacan's prison-
ers: 'Our approach to the object must also be immediate or receptive; we
must alter nothing in the object as it presents itself'.39 Indeed, the prisoners
expect that the solution to the problem will be instantly revealed in the
simple beholding of the sensuous givens of the situation (within the discur-
sive framework of the experiment, or the rules of the game). The eminent
task facing Lacan's prisoners is that of observation or passive apprehension
- this part of the process is thus equivalent to the Hegelian stage of
Consciousness, or Sense-certainty.
But for Lacan, as for Hegel, the plot thickens quickly: their subjects'
'certain' knowledge collapses into a complex symbiosis between two discrete
'Thises'- theknown and the knower.40Knowledgecomes onthe sceneinthe
mediation of the two 'thises'; literally in the grammatical interstices between
the 'I' andtheobject:'Two blacks ::one white'. In the second moment, there-
fore, the immediate veracity of sense-knowledge is confounded, the subject
and the predicate are confused, and the solution to the problem the prisoners
face ﬁnds an alternate expression: 'Were I a black, the two whites I see would
wastenotime inrealisingthey arewhites'.41 ToadoptHegel's terminology,it
becomes Self-conscious knowledge:
Self-consciousness is, to begin with, simple being-for-self, self-equal
through the exclusion from itself of everything else. For it, its essence
and absolute object is 'I'.42
Knowledge undergoes a reﬂection whereby its basis is withdrawn from the
original object, 'the pure this', and attributed to the knower or the 'I'. The
Robert Stark The immanent logic of human experience
1161

current of identiﬁcation is reversed. Instead of passively encountering and
interpreting the sensual world, the individual ﬁnds that its meaning must
come from within himself. The identity that Sense-certain knowledge
enjoyed with the external world is taken to heart, and the individual
(Consciousness and Self-consciousness) becomes all of reality, as in naı¨ve
idealism.
With Self-consciousness, Lacan's prisoners become capable of 'com-
prehending' their situation for the ﬁrst time - in Hegel's sense, in contra-
distinction to the passive 'apprehending' of Conscious, Sense-certain
thought.43 At the Consciousness stage of the deduction, the absence of a
conclusive sensual conﬁguration precluded the problem's logical resol-
ution: the prisoners are not faced by two blacks but two whites, a combi-
nation that permits no immediate, and therefore purely logical, resolution.
The solution is held at one logical remove from the prisoners: the object of
their senses must be relinquished, and replaced by a hypothesis. It is no
longer what the prisoners are faced with, but how they imagine themselves
that is decisive. Were I black . . . assuredly constitutes this same Hegelian,
Self-conscious movement, 'Self-equal through the exclusion from itself
of everything else'. In practice, the self is reduced to abstract potentiality
for the prisoners; their essence is reduced to their imagined appearance
to the others. The advent of Self-consciousness is the moment at which
the personal ontology required by the warden ﬁrst becomes feasible,
although it has yet to become a practice rather than an evident given.
Crucially, it has yet to be challenged or doubted. The prisoner must yet
seek his own measure, expression, and conﬁrmation manifest directly in
the sensual world.
Again, we are forced to acknowledge the inherent transience of this
thought. It is by no means assured that each of the participants will con-
clude that they are white at this stage of the deduction. If one of the prison-
ers lets the others precede him he will, as Lacan concedes, arrive at the
(false) conclusion that he has a black disc, and with as much conviction
as the others.44 The Self-conscious mode of thought permits a hypothesis,
but it remains essentially capricious and therefore fallible. Hegel expresses
this same aporia as the Unhappy Consciousness, contending that 'this con-
sciousness, instead of being self-identical, is in fact nothing but a purely
casual, confused medley, the dizziness of a perpetually self-engendered dis-
order'.45 The doubt into which Lacan allows his subjects to fall is inherent
to the condition that they ﬁnd themselves in, and while it is occasioned by
the hesitance they encounter in the others, it is equally a function of their
own uncertainty and ontological anxiety. For Lacan, this moment proves
to be of the utmost importance as a theoretical basis for many of the dis-
orders he encounters as a clinical psychoanalyst. For the prisoners,
Textual Practice
1162

however, this anxiety is enough to propel them beyond mere Self-
consciousness.
The third moment of Lacan's paradigm corresponds to the third
moment of Hegel's underlying dialectic: it is the synthesis of the Conscious
and Self-conscious moments in the prisoners' analysis, their coming to
Reason. Hegel comes closest to this articulation, in both senses of the
word, in his Propaedeutic (1808-1811):
Reason is the supreme uniﬁcation of consciousness and self-con-
sciousness, of knowledge of an object and knowledge of self. It is
the certainty that its determinations are objective, that is, that they
are the determinations of the essence of things, as well as being
our own thoughts. In one and the same thought, it is both self-cer-
tainty (subjectivity) and being, or objectivity.46
The prisoners in Lacan's essay, to be sure, must utilize both conscious and
self-conscious thought simultaneously. The ﬁrst prisoner must formulate
his conclusion thus: were I black, the other would say to himself 'were I too
black, the third (white) competitor would have left'. Since this did not
happen, then I (the ﬁrst prisoner) must be white. The prisoner consciously
objectiﬁes the self-conscious mode of thought he ﬁnds in himself. He is
able not only to formulate a conclusion for and of himself, but also to
externalize the dialogue he undergoes with himself in the state of
Unhappy Consciousness and impute its logic to his adversary, who in
this identiﬁcation loses his antagonistic status. He becomes capable of
superceding the contradiction posed by his Unhappy Consciousness by
attaining to the truth of Unhappy Consciousness per se:
Action and being, as being that of this particular consciousness, are
being and action in themselves, there has arisen for consciousness
the idea of Reason, of the certainty that, in its particular individuality,
it has being absolutely in itself, or is all reality.47
The solution, this time, is held at two logical removes from the participants,
but between the sensual object and the sensing consciousness, a common
denominator has been found. Without this mediation, both deed and
mental reﬂection would be forfeit, since the conjunction of 'action and
being' is necessary for either to exist independently or immediately. This
common denominator is Reason, which has a legitimate dominion over
both since it articulates the imperatives of each.
Reason has been the aim of Lacan's prisoners from the outset, their
instructions having been to conclude, using 'logical and not simply prob-
abilistic reasons', the nature of their inscription; that is, to come to a
Robert Stark The immanent logic of human experience
1163

knowledge of themselves that corresponds to the situation as they behold it,
but through the eyes of the others.48 In this ideal, as well as in the dialec-
tical movement evinced en route, Lacan's argument closely parallels the
argument Hegel puts forth in the ﬁrst part of the Phenomenology. But
the neatness of this identiﬁcation forces its inadequacy upon us. We
must note that to become capable of reﬁning Reason - in formulating a
viable escape from their logical internment - Lacan's subjects must be
capable of Reason in the ﬁrst place.
This has two important implications for our analysis of Lacan's text.
First, it allows us to inscribe the comparison on a fundamentally different
level than that so far proposed: the dialectic underpinning Lacan's sophism
is not that of Consciousness, Self-consciousness, and Reason, but of
Reason itself. While the original three moments of this dialectic ﬁnd them-
selves in what is now proposed, their 'truth' has been invested with a more
nuanced and explicit veracity; it has become more elaborate in passing from
the general to the speciﬁc, from Consciousness, Self-consciousness and
Reason per se, to Observing Reason, Rational Self-consciousness, and,
ultimately, Rational Individuality being-in-and-for-itself.49 Second -
more importantly - Reason must again be understood to circumscribe
itself. Both Lacan and Hegel (at this stage at least) start with rational sub-
jects and invest them with the capacity to ﬁnd in Reason an unmitigated
truth or 'certainty of being all reality'.50 Clearly, there is a faculty
capable of registering the changes of a mutable Reason over time, and
making it accountable to the world despite its variance with itself. For
Hegel, achieving objective (and no longer merely subjective) Reason is
tantamount to attaining Spiritual existence, and for Lacan this amounts
to gaining freedom through self-knowledge.
The hermeneutics of logical time
The Phenomenology of Spirit and 'Logical Time and the Assertion of Antici-
pated Certainty: A New Sophism' outline a similar dialectic, and, indeed,
they seem to require the introduction of some sort of logical calculus, or
meta-logic, to compensate for the over-determination of reason they
both evince, and to enable the perfection of rational perspicuity that
each ultimately requires. Lacan's 'Logical Time' hypothesis affords us pre-
cisely this capability. Furthermore, we can come to an understanding of
how this concept can become cardinal to a reading of The Phenomenology
of Spirit without getting overly embroiled in Lacan's very difﬁcult argu-
ment. If the question is: how are Lacan's prisoners capable of reaching a
reasonable decision? Lacan answers directly:
Textual Practice
1164

The subject objectiﬁes something more than the factual givens offered
him by the sight of the two whites. A certain time deﬁnes itself (in the
two senses of taking on meaning and ﬁnding its limit).51
The subjects' hesitation, that is, their momentary inability to make a logical
connection, the time it takes for reason to make itself known, comes to be
instrumental in securing the successful prisoner's freedom. Recalling the
solution, each of the prisoners in Lacan's paradigm ﬁnds himself in three
discrete predicaments and formulates three solutions accordingly: (1) the
terms of release having been divulged, the prisoners are faced with their
competitors in the knowledge that each has the means of freedom before
them; each proceeds to the exit armed with a solution as to his status.
(2) Having ostensibly solved the problem for himself, each prisoner wit-
nesses the fact of the others' solution in the movement they evince. Each
prisoner hesitates at seeing the others similarly disposed to answer -
however, the concomitant hesitation each prisoner then witnesses in the
others galvanizes his resolve, and, again, each proceeds towards the exit
with conﬁdence. (3) The renewed conﬁdence of the others was not
expected - each hesitates again - but once more, the manifest doubt of
the others establishes the truth of their own ontological status, and this
time beyond doubt. It takes time for reason to make itself known, and for
it to be foresworn with conﬁdence. Moreover, without the passage of
time, the prisoners' logic would fail them.
As counterintuitive as this sounds, we have already seen that a
similar trait prevails in The Phenomenology: the rhythm of the dialectic is
punctuated by moments of relative quietude, and the Hegelian subject
does indeed dither almost complacently at times, so we should not be sur-
prised to ﬁnd hesitation an integral part of Lacan's dialectic.52 The impor-
tance of hesitation would seem to suggest that the solution could not be
forthcoming were it not for the temporal order the solution assumes in
its unfolding; that hesitation, whilst it may prove decisive, can have no
strictly logical potency. And yet this is precisely what Lacan refuses to
admit:
It is not, therefore, because of some dramatic contingency, the ser-
iousness of the stakes, or the competitiveness of the game, that
time presses; it is owing to the urgency of the logical movement
that the prisoner precipitates both his judgment and his departure.53
The required logical conclusion and the appropriate temporal resolution
are only forthcoming by an act of will on the part of the subject. This is
extraordinary. He explicitly disregards the interpretative paradigm of 'dra-
matic contingency' - what we might call narrative time54 - time in its
Robert Stark The immanent logic of human experience
1165

processional, merely contingent, linear capacity; and implicitly rejects a
logical paradigm, since the prisoner himself 'precipitates both his judgment
and his departure' - rushing 'headlong' into a decision that 'anticipates its
own certitude' so that the conclusion cannot follow as an autonomous or
valid logical resultant.55 The logical 'urgency' Lacan alludes to is neither
the requirement to be ﬁrst in formulating a response for the warden (dra-
matically contingent) nor the immediate formal consequence of sensually
evident data (logically contingent). We are obliged to note that Lacan
rejects both temporal and logical primacy here, but without rejecting
either the temporal or the logical. Indeed, 'The two sides of the opposition'
are 'not so much . . . both false as both true', as McTaggart would have
it. Under Lacan's rubric, the temporal and the logical have become con-
taminated in such a way that assumes the temporal is always and already
logical, and that the logical is always and already temporal. This is what
Lacan has in mind when he tenders 'Logical Time', and what Merleau-
Ponty emphasized as the 'immanent logic of human experience'. The
movement remains 'urgent', but in such a way that will not tolerate
reduction to a uniquely temporal or logical urgency. The dialectic owes
its authority to a determinate prolepsis of its own truth. Lacan summarizes
as follows:
The assertive judgment ﬁnally manifests itself here as an act . . . What
makes this act so remarkable . . . is that it anticipates its own certitude
owing to the temporal tension with which it is subjectively charged;
that, based on this very anticipation, its certitude is veriﬁed in a
logical precipitation determined by the discharge of its tension -
so that in the end the conclusion is no longer grounded on anything
but completely objectiﬁed temporal instances; and that the assertion
is desubjectiﬁed to the utmost.56
There is much in this explanation that warrants explaining. The whole
movement, from reason to meta-reason, is said to draw its potency from
a 'temporal tension' experienced between the subject and his adversaries
in the game; as such, it is thoroughly embroiled in a hermeneutics of the
subject, as well as in society at large. By 'temporal tension' we are to under-
stand the 'time of lagging behind the others' that arises because the subject
is not only obliged to formulate his own solution, but also to put the words
of the solution into the mouth of his adversaries, and to assimilate into
his solution the various hesitations evinced by the group, who are, he
(falsely) considers, under no such tie.57 The disparity that emerges
between the subjective time that passes for the individual prisoner and
the objective time which he (falsely) attributes to the actions of the
group constitutes a 'temporal tension'. They should logically precede
Textual Practice
1166

him in formulating their response, and the subject must commit himself
to a decision about his identity lest they precede him. This decision is a
forced choice: having made it - that is, having made towards the door
for the third and ﬁnal time - the subject can then conﬁrm that the
choice was rational, but until the decision becomes manifest as action
the decision remains unfounded. It lacks an integral piece of the puzzle
in the objectiﬁed 'moment of concluding' that will be articulated in the
interval between the suspension of the second movement and the com-
mencement of the third and ﬁnal movement. The logical component of
the rationale must be completed before the conclusion can be reached,
but all the logical determining factors cannot be given until the conclusion
is reached.
Thus, when Lacan reminds us that 'doubt has, since Descartes,
been integrated into the value of judgment', we should not be content
to take him metaphorically or even methodologically.58 As we can
clearly see, doubt is literally an integral part of reason. For the Lacanian
subject to act - that is, for the subject to renounce mere opinion and
seek to validate his thoughts in the world - is for him to categorically
state that his thought is mere opinion. It should not be forgotten that
this temporal tension is a fallacy, wrongly intuited by the subject - and
this is why Lacan's problem is strictly a sophism - but it is, nonetheless,
a fallacy that is a necessary and integral part of any solution to the
problem. An irrational assumption provides for a rational action. Authen-
ticity can be achieved only in the face of inauthenticity. If freedom is to be
won, the subject must stake his life, renouncing his intentions with his
actions. If freedom is won, it is primarily a freedom from the bad blood
of self-consciousness, from what Hegel calls the 'dizziness of perpetually
self-engendered disorder'.59
This, then, is the meaning of 'Logical Time': it is the anticipation that
is made possible by the ossiﬁcation and logical elaboration of experience; it
is that which, in turn, makes possible the exegetic calculus required to
reason at all. By implementing Logical Time, we synthesize logic and
time, facilitating an analysis that supposes their equal valence. The domin-
ion of Logical Time exceeds that of logic or time. By implementing Logical
Time, we also synthesize the rational and the irrational, since we become
capable of pronouncing a meta-reason that not only accounts for
reason's variance with itself - its inherent discontinuity - but also of
forging meaning from doubt, determinate negation from mere negation.
Indeed, to state our discovery in these terms is to make its pertinence to
The Phenomenology of Spirit utterly apparent. For the remainder of this
essay I will be content to tease out a little of what all this means for
Hegel, although much will already have been understood, or - more
appropriately - anticipated.
Robert Stark The immanent logic of human experience
1167

Indeed, Logical Time ﬁnds a recognizable corollary in Hegel:
Spirit displays the process of its becoming Spirit in the form of free
contingent happening, intuiting its pure Self as Time outside of it,
and equally its being as space.60
As Reason unfolds in Logical Time - both 'free' to unfold in the ﬂuid struc-
ture of its own succession and 'contingent' upon the logical strictures it must
perforce cling to in its various moments - it becomes Spirit. In Hegelian
Spirit, we ﬁnd both essential features of Logical Time: the objectiﬁcation
of experience, and the precocious prolepsis that Lacan's prisoners are
capable of. Spirit is the construct that is cognizant of its own identity with
everything that is not itself - self-equal through inclusion of all that is not
itself - it is the moment that sees itself reﬂected in eternity, and the Con-
sciousness that makes itself a monad encompassing all points. It reconciles
time with space. Spirit - not time, and not logic - is the absolute datum
on which the Hegelian Consciousness is brought to awareness:
Spirit is thus self-supporting, absolute, real being. All previous shapes
of consciousness are abstract forms of it. They result from Spirit ana-
lyzing itself, distinguishing its moments, and dwelling for a while
with each.61
As the above comments make abundantly clear, Spirit, as the perfection of
Reason, is also a meta-logical construct, and we should not be surprised to
note that its Reason, if we may so speak, also incorporates both the logical
and the illogical.
This becomes clearest when we consider the Hegelian act. Indeed, the
dilemma faced by the Hegelian subject in contemplating action is precisely
that faced by the Lacanian subject:
The individual who is going to act seems . . . to ﬁnd himself in a circle
in which each moment already presupposes the other, and thus he
seems unable to begin, because he only gets to know his original
nature, which must be his End, from the deed, while in order to act,
he must have that End beforehand. But for that very reason he has
to start immediately, and, whatever the circumstances, without
further scruples about beginning, means, or End, proceed to action.62
The problem of setting forth is the more acute since the end must be antici-
pated though it cannot be known; the subject must act on a blind convic-
tion. Only the most irrational person would act on instinct, it would seem,
and yet it is only in so doing that Reason can assert itself at all. But this is
Textual Practice
1168

more than a familiar hermeneutic platitude. It is precisely the gnawing
doubt that besets the agent that is the essential element in action, it is pre-
cisely this doubt which makes of the negative something determinate. In
his leap of faith, the subject must anticipate the subtlest vicissitudes of
the world; he must, by a supreme act of will, shape the world according
to his own thoughts and desires. The act, therefore, posits itself as a
'unity of action and being'.63
The act is of paramount importance to Hegel and the evolution of con-
sciousness he projects. He says quite categorically, 'the true being of a man is
. . . his deed . . . it is the deed that does away with . . . what is [merely] meant
to be', and yet, nonetheless, the Hegelian act is continually misunder-
stood.64 The radical difference between thought and act cannot be over-
stated. Authentic action is not the mere implementation of thought for
Hegel, its logical or temporal consequence, but a qualitatively different occur-
rence that can only be realized at great pains, for it must be subject to the
radical skepticism - the 'Bacchanalian revel in which no member is not
drunk' - that makes every action more or less arbitrary, as outlined
above.65 The Spirit, and not Reason, enables action. Reason must be objec-
tiﬁed, it must take its place in the world of objective content and be recog-
nized as having a legitimate sway over all merely individual thought. In just
the same way as Lacan's prisoners are obliged to make a substantial given of
the time that elapses in their coming to reason, or attribute their thoughts to
their adversaries in order to arrive at a solution, Hegel's subject must ossify
his thought so that consciousness may be directed at it; he must hazard his
thought as though it were already made tangible in the world. Reason must
take its place in a society that jointly gives action meaning, and takes its
meaning from this action; it must be tested and proven in action. Hegel
states that 'action alters nothing and opposes nothing. It is the pure form
of transition from a state of not being seen to one of being seen'.66 We do
not act on objects but realize them and participate in Spirit with them:
'the organism does not produce something but only preserves itself; or,
what is produced, is as much already present as produced'.67 The Cartesian
apposition of mind and matter is, for Hegel, a fallacy. Reason becomes for-
itself what it was in-itself when it recognizes this error, and in doing so
becomes spiritualized.
At the dawning of Spiritual being, the subject shifts quite dramatically
from an overtly psychological existence to a more ostensibly social one, as
the shift to a more obviously historical narrative in the second half of The
Phenomenology testiﬁes. The emergence of society - and true sociability -
is, for Hegel, symptomatic of the attainment of Spiritual being:
Spirit is - this absolute substance which is the unity of the different
independent self-consciousnesses which, in their opposition, enjoy
Robert Stark The immanent logic of human experience
1169

perfect freedom and independence: 'I' that is 'We' and 'We' that is 'I'
. . . it leaves behind the colourful show of the sensuous here-and-now
and the nightlike void of the supersensible beyond, and steps out into
the spiritual light of the present.68
In short, it is not enough that individual action is either extended into the
world or that it there meets resistance. Individual action must encounter
itself in the world; it must ﬁnd conﬁrmation of its speciﬁc being in univer-
sal being. We have seen already in 'Logical Time and the Assertion of
Anticipated Certainty' that the prisoners positively require the action of
others before they are able to even approximate a solution to their own
internment, how they must objectify the duration of their adversaries'
actions as well as their hesitations, how they must arrive at a solution
mutually or not at all, that 'the assertion is desubjectiﬁed to the
utmost'.69 The same is true for the Hegelian subject. To assert the unity
of the difference between independent Self-consciousness, as Hegel does
here, to extol this 'ambiguous otherness', goes not only to the heart of
Hegel's social philosophy but also to the very centre of his metaphysic.70
The otherness is ambiguous because the independent Self-consciousness
may equally pertain to the previous states of the one consciousness, or to
the simultaneous state of another consciousness entirely. The difference
between self-equal by exclusion and self-equal by inclusion is ultimately
elided by the spiritual consciousness. In the realm where thought and
action are one, the distinction between self and other is void - or
rather, it is at once a distinction and no distinction at all. Authentic
action, that is to say, is mutual action. For example:
The individuality of the 'way of the world' may well imagine that it
acts only for itself or in its own interests. It is better than it thinks, for
its action is at the same time an implicitly universal action. When it
acts in its own interests it simply does not know what it is doing; and
when it avers that everyone acts in his own interests it is merely assert-
ing that no one knows what action is.71
Or, more succinctly, 'the movement of individuality is the reality of the
universal'.72 For Hegel, there is no such thing as an innocuous action:
actions are all meaningful, even if we do not, cannot grasp their full signiﬁ-
cance. Meaning takes on a certain autonomy in Hegel, and is by no means
fully apparent to the subject that heralds it. It unfolds in Spirit, or in
Logical Time, and not in time or logic exclusively. As Hyppolite observes,
'Hegel's logic is a thought which thinks itself'.73
We require only a philosophically enlightened guide to enable us even
as Dante required Virgil to guide him on his fraught journey, someone to
Textual Practice
1170

whom the perils are familiar, who has navigated the terrain before. Hegel,
or at any rate the 'we' of philosophic agency in The Phenomenology, is such
a guide. He offers The Phenomenology of Spirit as a testament to his own
journey, as it were - his coming to philosophical consciousness - in the
belief that it transcends his own subjectivity and carries an objective or uni-
versal signiﬁcance. In this sense, all of us who would know ourselves and
our world are philosophers. If we ascribe Absolute Knowledge to the
author it is not to suggest that he is infallible, or has done with the folly
we must enact in our experiences, but precisely the opposite: to acknowl-
edge the enlightenment that comes of having gone through the journey
before and having learned the positive signiﬁcance of the errors that
persist: 'Absolute Knowing, or Spirit that knows itself as Spirit, has for
its path . . . recollection'.74 Having considered and accounted individual
psychology and social history, having drawn inferences and conclusions
based, as far as possible, on all this reﬂection, Hegel is only then in a pos-
ition to undergo truly rational thought on these subjects. This is why he
continually referred to The Phenomenology as a prelude to his serious phi-
losophical work. Absolute Knowledge, in a sense, is that which has to be
assumed at the outset in order to proceed with philosophical thought at
all (in precisely the same way as Lacan's subjects must ultimately forego
any strictly rational criteria for acting judiciously, and act). If the Absolute
can never itself be given that does not mean to say that it has not a cardinal
role to play in the very fabric of our day-to-day lives, in the development of
ourselves, our cultures, our religions, nations, etc., that something beyond
the merely particular does not condition our thoughts and actions. Rather,
as Lacan reminds us in 'The Field and Function of Speech and Language',
'we must be attentive to the 'un-said' that lies in the holes of the discourse',
and by assuming the Absolute we may perhaps hope to confer on our
thought the 'dialectical punctuation' that it requires from the outset.75
What proves rational is that which can be justiﬁed as such after the fact.
What proves spiritual is that which endures and is brought forth to light.
No doubt this leads to inconsistencies. But Hegel's point, ultimately
considered, is to suggest that these inconsistencies are precisely what makes
progress - personal, social, historical progress - possible in the ﬁrst place.
As Zˇizˇek puts it, again very much apropos here:
farfromsignalingthefailureofourthoughttograspreality,theinherent
inconsistency of our notional apparatus is the ultimate proof that our
thought is not merely a logical game we play, but is able to reach
reality itself, expressing its inherent structuring principle.76
Reality will not be bent to comply with simple syllogisms - it is, therefore,
irrational - but that does not mean to say that it cannot be brought under
Robert Stark The immanent logic of human experience
1171

the sway of a larger, expanded Reason that does not balk at the mutable.
The possessor of Absolute Knowledge has not a ﬁxed understanding that
may be subjugated to expound any number of local predicaments, but a
contradictory and vanishing account of a ﬂeeting world. That which
exceeds Reason for Hegel is the Spirit, whose shades and forms we are
given to know in The Phenomenology. To experience these, often peculiar,
vestiges is to participate in a properly romantic Vision rather than a purely
reasonable espousal of philosophical truth, and requires a certain amount
of collusion on the part of the reader if it is to seem entirely plausible,
and this is perhaps why the study of Hegel has more often been left to
the humanist, the poet, or the analyst, than the philosopher. But it is pre-
cisely this quality that lends to The Phenomenology of Spirit the air of a
great, familiar epic, and guarantees its continued relevance - regardless
of whether it is reasoned to be true, or false, or both.
The University of Exeter
Notes
1 J.M.E. McTaggart, Studies in the Hegelian Dialectic (Cambridge: Cambridge
UP, 1922).
2 G.W.F. Hegel, Phenomenology of Spirit, trans. A.V. Miller (Oxford: Oxford
UP, 1977).
3 McTaggart, Hegelian Dialectic, p. 129.
4 Ibid., p. 191.
5 Michel Foucault, Archaeology of Knowledge, trans. A.M. Sheridan Smith
(New York: Pantheon, 1972).
6 Ibid., p. 235.
7 Cf. The Phenomenology of Spirit, pp. 22-23. All references to Hegel are to The
Phenomenology of Spirit unless otherwise stated.
8 Jacques Lacan, E´crits, a Selection, trans. Alan Sheridan (New York: Norton,
1977).
9 McTaggart, Hegelian Dialectic, p. 157.
10 Ibid., pp. 157-158.
11 The synthesis we are hoping for, in keeping with the spirit of The Phenomen-
ology, thus presents itself not only as a formal possibility, but also appears on
the scene in the happenstance of the history of Hegelian scholarship. A syn-
thesis of the rational and the irrational, of the logical and the temporal in
The Phenomenology would be tantamount to an aufhebung of the interpretative
impasse that Hegelian studies has for so long stood poised at.
12 Karl Marx, Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844, trans. Martin
Milligan (Buffalo: Prometheus, 1987), p. 159.
13 Gilles Deleuze, Cinema 1, the Movement-Image, trans. Hugh Tomlinson and
Barbara Habberjam (Minneapolis: Minnessota UP, 1986).
Textual Practice
1172

14 Ibid., p. 37.
15 Slavoj Zˇizˇek, Tarrying with the Negative: Kant, Hegel, and the Critique of Ideol-
ogy (Durham: Duke UP, 1993), p. 84.
16 Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Sense and Non-Sense, trans. Colin Smith (Evanston:
Northwestern UP, 1964), p. 65; Jacques Lacan, 'Logical Time and the Asser-
tion of Anticipated Certainty: A New Sophism', trans. Bruce Fink, Newsletter
of the Freudian Field, II.2 (1988), pp. 4-22.
17 Cf. 'Unity, difference, and relation are categories each of which is nothing in
and for itself, but only in relation to its opposite, and they cannot therefore be
separated from one another' (Hegel, Phenomenology, p. 219).
18 Jean Hyppolite, Genesis and Structure of Hegel's Phenomenology of Spirit,
trans. Samuel Cherniak and John Heckman (Evanston: Northwestern UP,
1974).
19 Ibid., p. 270.
20 Hegel, Phenomenology, pp. 37-38.
21 Slavoj Zˇizˇek, The Ticklish Subject: The Absent Centre of Political Ontology
(London: Verso, 1999), p. 76.
22 McTaggart, Hegelian Dialectic, p. 166.
23 Hegel, Phenomenology, p. 49.
24 Ultimately, this persistency of thought is as essential for an understanding of
the Absolute as it is indispensable for an understanding of the dialectical move-
ment towards the Absolute, and it is by recognizing this persistency in the face
of obsolescence that we can account for the dialectical conjunction of the two.
Again, we are drawn to an important feature of the process of Aufhebung.
25 Hegel, Phenomenology, pp. 6-7.
26 Merleau-Ponty, Sense and Non-Sense, p. 63.
27 Hegel, Phenomenology, p. 181.
28 Ibid., p. 181.
29 Marx, Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts, p. 146; Hegel, Phenomenology,
p. 22.
30 Hegel, Phenomenology, p. 11.
31 Ibid., p. 5.
32 Ibid., p. 10.
33 Ibid., p. 19.
34 Ibid., p. 40. Cf. Phenomenology, pp. 35-41. The ﬁrst paragraph on p. 218
(§361) addresses this matter in some depth.
35 The assumption is that this will circumvent a merely analytical interpretation;
application of the 'same . . . [inert] . . . formula' to whatever is encountered,
and divulging merely 'arbitrary insights into the content' of the predicative
thought contained in The Phenomenology (Hegel, p. 9).
36 Jacques Lacan, 'Logical Time and the Assertion of Anticipated Certainty: A
New Sophism', Newsletter of the Freudian Field, II.2 (1988), pp. 4-5.
37 The comparison is a rich and fruitful one to the student of Hegel or Lacan, and
has many subtle facets that cannot be fully developed here. One might make
more than I have here of the idiomatic similarities between the two (in master-
slave vs. warden-prisoner, perhaps), the heuristic reason emphasized and the
Robert Stark The immanent logic of human experience
1173

'sophistic value' of truth, the role of language, the mediation of internal and
external and the move towards the possibility of 'social' thought and action,
the importance of the goal, desire . . . I will concentrate on the structural/topo-
graphical similarities here - the dialectic and its role in reason (and subjectiv-
ity). One cannot help but summarize Lacan's article as an allegorical rendering
of the whole Hegelian dialectic; an attempt to form a concise and contempor-
ary account of a text that was already peripheral in psychoanalytic thought at
the time Lacan was writing, but was not recognized as such.
38 Lacan, 'Logical Time', p. 11.
39 Hegel, Phenomenology, p. 58.
40 Ibid., p. 59.
41 Lacan, 'Logical Time', p. 11.
42 Hegel, Phenomenology, p. 13.
43 Ibid., p. 58.
44 Lacan, 'Logical Time', p. 15.
45 Hegel, Phenomenology, pp. 124-125.
46 My immediate source for this passage is Hyppolite, Genesis and Structure,
p. 221.
47 Hegel, Phenomenology, p. 130. Lest we lose the relevance of this to the
prisoners' situation, let us note Hyppolite's pre´cis: 'Self Consciousness will
surmount its subjectivity and agree to alienate it and pose it as being. But
then being itself will have become self-consciousness, and self-consciousness
will be being' (Genesis and Structure, p. 196). The imaginary rationale I
furnished above performs the same essential action.
48 Lacan, 'Logical Time', p. 5.
49 Jacques Derrida points out the labour required by the dialectic and process of
Aufhebung which must conserve as well as supersede the previous stage of the
dialectic. To arrive at an understanding of the Rational dialectic one must
begin with the underlying dialectic, work with it as an ore, invest one's time
and effort in forming 'meaning, concept, time and truth' (Writing and Differ-
ence, trans. Alan Bass (Chicago: Chicago UP, 1978), p. 255). By itself, as I have
suggested already, the dialectic is an inert formula that draws its meaning from
the elaboration it receives.
50 Hegel, Phenomenology, p. 263.
51 Lacan, 'Logical Time', p. 11.
52 The subject must hold its knowledge to be all of knowledge in order that it may
then effect the requisite negation of this knowledge and so progress along 'the
way of the Soul'; were it not for this succumbing to idleness, then, there would
be no new knowledge and therefore no progress.
53 Lacan, 'Logical Time', p. 13.
54 Lacan elsewhere proffers 'objective time' (Ibid., p. 15).
55 Lacan, 'Logical Time', p. 15.
56 Ibid., pp. 14-15.
57 Ibid., p. 12.
58 Ibid., p. 15.
59 Hegel, Phenomenology, p. 125.
Textual Practice
1174

60 Ibid., p. 492.
61 Ibid., p. 264.
62 Ibid., p. 240.
63 Ibid., p. 241.
64 Ibid., p. 193.
65 Ibid., p. 27.
66 Ibid., p. 237.
67 Ibid., p. 156.
68 Ibid., pp. 110-111.
69 Lacan, 'Logical Time', p. 15.
70 Hegel, Phenomenology, p. 111.
71 Ibid., p. 235.
72 Ibid., p. 235.
73 Hyppolite, Genesis and Structure, p. 261.
74 Hegel, Phenomenology, p. 493.
75 Jacques Lacan, E´crits, a Selection (New York: Norton, 1977), pp. 93, 95.
76 Zˇizˇek, Ticklish Subject, p. 99.
Robert Stark The immanent logic of human experience
1175

