Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology
ISSN: 0007-1773 (Print) 2332-0486 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rbsp20
Natality, Event, Revolution: The Political
Phenomenology of Hannah Arendt
Michael Marder
To cite this article: Michael Marder (2013) Natality, Event, Revolution: The Political
Phenomenology of Hannah Arendt, Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology, 44:3,
302-320, DOI: 10.1080/00071773.2013.11006808
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00071773.2013.11006808
Published online: 21 Oct 2014.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 496
View related articles 
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rbsp20

Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology, Vol. 44, No. 3, October 2013
NATALITY, EVENT, REVOLUTION: THE POLITICAL
PHENOMENOLOGY OF HANNAH ARENDT
MICHAEL MARDER
The conceptual framework of The Human Condition — arguably Arendt's
most original achievement — helps shed light on phenomenology itself, viewed
under the lens of the tripartite distinction between labour, work, and action.
First, phenomenological labour is endless, to the extent that it is imbricated
with the inexhaustible variety of the lifeworld and with the non-formal
exigencies of givenness, just as physical "labour, caught in the cyclical
movement of the body's life process, has neither beginning nor end".1 It reflects
the materiality of phenomenological practice that draws on what is given (to
perception, for instance) to make sense of its givenness. There is no glimmer of
freedom in its purely reactive response to what is, incapable of questioning the
how, as opposed to the what, of givenness.  
Second, phenomenology, conceived as work, is precisely this "fabrication"
of sense marked by "a definite beginning and a definite, predictable end," (HC
143) which corresponds to the culmination of empty intentionality in fulfilled
intuitions. This is, so to speak, the detective work of establishing connections
between the merely intended and the givenness of what was intended, the work
of drawing up definite correlations between the various aspects of the
phenomenological nous. Teleological through and through, it harbors a great
dose of ideality, having extracted acts of consciousness from their temporal
horizons, severed connections among them, and transplanted noetic and
noematic correlates onto transcendental grounds. The absolutizing of
intentionality confers a greater degree of freedom on the phenomenological
enterprise, while the bittersweet fruit of this daring is transcendental idealism,
often forgetful of the very materiality it unearthed in its labours.
Finally, phenomenology as action has a variety of beginnings but no definite
end, because it incessantly and critically undermines, de-idealizes, and de-
formalizes 
itself. 
Shadowing 
the 
possibilities 
of 
the 
ultimately
non-accomplishable, though still finite, human existence, phenomenology qua
action is inherently critical and self-critical, which is why its legacy to us is a
ruptured series of introductions, a discipline in crisis, one that freely thrives on
incomplete beginnings and drastic self-revisions. There is no shame in
remaining a novice, as far as rigorous phenomenological investigations are
concerned, for, assuming this posture over and over again, we follow the
exigencies of existence and practically embody the critical injunction to strive
to the things themselves. Tellingly, inserted into Arendt's conceptual scheme,
this last instantiation of phenomenology would be consonant with the political
302

principle of a self-disrupting multiplicity, the condition of human plurality and
natality, and the locus essendi of critical political phenomenology.
Each of the three perspectives presupposes a distinct notion of truth. The
first is still beholden to the veracity of the natural attitude, unable to suspend the
actuality of the given nor to contemplate its possibilities. The true is what there
is in the "now" of perception, in whatever stands out from the horizon of
potentially perceivable things and falls into the spotlight of my sense-bestowing
gaze. The truth of phenomenological work, conversely, pivots on the traditional
idea of adequatio, albeit not of rei et intellectus (the thing and intellect) but of
the cognizing intention and its cognized object, as well as of intentionality and
lived experience as such. It ceases to draw on the actuality of the given thanks
to operating epoché in the transcendental field of pure phenomenology. Now,
phenomenology as action adheres to the existential conception of truth, which
it finds in itself, that is to say, in its possibilities, including those of dismantling
and recommencing its own way of thinking. If to act is to begin and if, further,
the beginning "is not the beginning of something out of something but of
somebody, who is a beginner himself" (HC 177), then the truth of action lies in
the beginners themselves, in their self-critical and "highly self-destructive"2
practice of phenomenology and of thinking in general. Neither subjectivism
nor solipsism, this figure of truth invests the actor with the power to fashion her
thought in the image of existence, according to which, regardless of our
biological age we are all beginners. 
The truth ingrained in the event of beginning marshals a series of political
implications.3 Although Arendt famously claimed that she was not a
philosopher — let alone a phenomenologist — but a political theorist, her views
on beginnings inaugurate one of the few political phenomenologies, deserving
of the name. It is well known that the accent she placed on natality, or, in
technical terms, thrownness, was meant as an Augustinian-inspired4
counterweight to the prominence of projection in Heidegger's philosophy. But
exactly how do beginnings function in Arendtian thought? The plural form in
this question is not an accident; in addition to considering beginnings in the
context of human multiplicities, Arendt conceptually doubles the very term
"beginning" into what turn out to be two very dissimilar notions. Only one of
these is identical to the fact of natality, namely, the first beginning that
necessarily implies the "supreme event" of our appearance within the world,
from which we disappear in the event of our death (HC 97). Such appearing is
not an act, even if it is already replete with phenomenological overtones; it lies
absolutely outside the sphere of our conscious control, in what Lévinas used to
call "the immemorial past," simultaneously disturbing and escaping the
subject's sphere of representation. It would be futile to apprehend this beginning
directly, which is why, supported by language and action, we must start again,
begin after beginning, with an unavoidable delay. Far from a straightforward
303

actualization of the merely potential first beginning (Arendt regards natality as
"the capacity of beginning something anew, that is, of acting" [HC 9]5), the
second beginning is a response to the first, from a temporal and conceptual
distance to it, the response that can never respond enough to the unrepresentable
condition it addresses. Any worthwhile human project will, henceforth, be
mediated through a dia-logue between the two beginnings, rid of the delusion
that it can gain full mastery over the "human condition" par excellence, i.e.,
natality.
On the most obvious interpretative surface, the second beginning is
equivalent to political action, the institution of polis as "the organization of
people as it arises out of acting and speaking together" and, therefore, as "the
space of appearance" (HC 198). The condition for the appearing of what
appears in this space is speech, logos, just as in classical phenomenology
phenomena can only appear thanks to being spoken about (I see what I speak
of). But it is a logos that is not at all incompatible with contention, critique,
disagreement, and nonviolent clashes of ideas, because it is fractured into a
multiplicity of more or less disparate beginnings. Even within one human being
logos is irreparably split against itself;6 the inner monologue, whereby, in
solitude, I speak to myself is already a dialogue across the minimal distance
between this I and myself, constituting the "primary condition of thought."7 A
variation on the Husserlian construction of the subject by means of hearing-
oneself-speak, political logos holds together, without synthesizing, many
beginnings, both within and outside myself. In fact, it transforms the very idea
of appearance from a merely physical-biological coming of the newborn into the
world to the public and almost theatrical making of one's appearance on the
political scene in the second beginning. Of course, the physicality of the newly
born human body is already public, as is any adumbrated phenomenon
accessible from a variety of viewpoints, especially because it is already caught
up in the web of expectations and logoi of others — parents, family, state
authorities, and so on. But the publicness of natality is insufficient to eliminate
the difference between the two beginnings: being born is being made to appear
in the world, while acting is making one's appearance and, thus, to a certain
extent, politically making the world into a "space of appearance".8
Not only does the political coming-into-being contain numerous references
to 
phenomenology, 
but 
also, 
and 
more 
significantly, 
Husserl's
phenomenological project betrays, on this reading, its undeniably political
meaning. Phenomenology, much like modern thought in general, is intent on
making a new beginning, such that "a reconstituting of the world by
consciousness" it calls for "would amount to a second creation in the sense that
through this reconstitution the world would lose its contingent character, which
is to say its character of reality, and it would no longer appear to man as a world
given, but as one created by him."9 The world recreated on the basis of
304

transcendental consciousness would be self-given: in this Husserl's Ideas
assumes an essentially political meaning as the philosophical instantiation of the
second beginning ("a second creation") which Arendt normally associates with
action and the realm of politics. The question is to what extent this
transformation retains a critical edge: to what extent it preserves the awareness
(though not the memory or any other conscious representation) of the first
beginning and the challenge it poses to all human, and especially humanist,
illusions of full mastery and control. 
Arendt's response to this question is markedly ambivalent. Husserl's
"arrogant modesty" lies in his "transforming ... alien Being into consciousness"
by means of turning the human being into "the creator of the world and of
himself" (arrogance), whilst trying "to comfort us about the very point in which
all of modern philosophy can take no comfort whatsoever, namely, that man is
forced to affirm a Being that he did not create and that is alien to his very
nature" (modesty) (EU 166, 167). To be fair, this transformation is never
complete, such that its incompletion prompts the unending activity of reduction,
bracketing, de-sedimentation. Self-givenness does not and cannot succeed in
fully eradicating the problem of givenness, unless it uncritically covers it over.
The materiality of phenomenological labour puts the brakes on the ideality of
its work in the maturity of its action. Unforgivably naïve is the thought that the
first beginning could be "transformed" into the second without leaving behind
an obstinate remainder, or in Freudian terms, that unconscious material could
be entirely elevated to the stratum of conscious representations. The second
beginning — be it political, phenomenological, or both at once — must be
placed within its proper fragile limits, delineated by the edges of the first
beginning, on the one hand, and by the sudden collapse of logos in philosophical
speechless wonder, violence, or totalitarianism, on the other. The work of this
delimitation will comprise the bulk of critical political phenomenology.
The above is not the sole corrective Arendt addresses to Husserlian
phenomenology. Her general, somewhat masked, rejoinders follow the vein of
Heidegger's existential preoccupations with the forever-incomplete course of
human life. From a critical perspective, they add up to a concerted attempt at
de-idealizing human existence, liberated from the constraints of teleology and
uprooted from the transcendental ground which is alien to it. Much in Arendt's
writings on the problem of freedom may be understood with reference to these
efforts, revealing that political experience is without evidence, because the
intentionality that underpins it necessarily lacks fulfilment. This, perhaps, is
the weightiest reason behind the opposition of political thought to the fetish of
instrumentality, an attitude oriented exclusively toward the accomplishment of
a predetermined end.10 When it comes to action, it would be tragic to aspire "to
the same fulfilment of intention that is the sign of mastership in ... intercourse
with natural, material things" (PP 58). There is no fulfilment of social or
305

political intentionality, because there is no such unified intentionality in the
first place aside from a patchwork of new beginnings, or, at best, loosely bound
common projects. Body politic is not analogous to a great person, such as the
Leviathan, with a coherent experience of its own. It is in this context that Arendt
mocks Plato's lament in The Laws to the effect that sense organs (eyes, ears,
hands) are "by nature private" and are not synthesizable into, for instance, the
eye of the polis (PP 61). Our biological bodies divide us as much as they bring
us together, but, in any event, they do not yield a collective experience, wherein
the intentionality of all would attain fulfilment. (These are the effects of political
facticity, the predication of politics on irreducible human plurality.) As a
consequence of this positive and eventful inaccomplishment, a space of freedom
opens up, where the ideal teleologies of phenomenology no longer work and,
moreover, where the work of phenomenology is simply inapplicable. 
The unpredictability of action, which forges a new beginning (PP 58f) and
renders infinite the temporal movement of intentionality right within the world of
human finitude, is the form of political experience without evidence. In this,
Arendt stays faithful to the alternative phenomenological tradition of Heidegger,
who showed that the intentionality of being-toward-death had no end even though
it rotated in the sphere of mortality and finitude, and she reaches conclusions
formally analogous to those of Lévinas, who substituted the figure of the other for
death. Neither my death nor the other nor, for that matter, an outcome of action,
as opposed to work, is given in the manner of phenomenological evidence: the
impossibility of claiming for oneself the full or fulfilled experience of these
liminal events is self-evident. The critique of Husserlian phenomenology becomes
interchangeable with a critique of sovereignty, of subjectivity fully in control of
itself and of its world, transcendentally insured against unpredictable empirical
accidents and deviations from the chosen course of action. The thought of
beginning, which is also the beginning of thought, removes, precisely, all such
assurances, to the extent that it preserves the qualitative difference between the
three modalities of time, irreducible to variations on the present.11 The
temporalizing event of what happens between "birth" and "will" supplants the
perceptual foundations of phenomenology. 
Along with the foundationalism of the present, Arendt purges from her
political theory the idea of foundations as such. When Husserl distinguished
the founded from the founding layers of thought and experience, he succumbed
to the kind of de-historicization of phenomenology that some deemed to be
liberating. Whereas Hegelian- and Marxist-leaning critical theorists deplore this
feature of phenomenology, Arendt welcomes the return to the things themselves
in all their materiality as a break with the speculative view of human history (EU
166). But the break comes with a price tag: the idea of foundation has covered
over the much more unruly and unpredictable capacity to begin. Foundation is
an event that impedes the coming to pass of future events. Were Husserl to
306

indulge in a healthy dose of historical speculation, as Arendt herself does, he
would have discovered that "foundation" was a Roman invention, which put the
discrete act of beginning in the service of permanence, continuity, and, finally,
authority.12 An expression of freedom (to begin and to persevere within the
beginning) for the Roman spirit,13 the foundation admits of no ruptures and
forbids new beginnings; it allows nothing else but a continuous derivation of
history as the unfolding of the foundation on its own turf, in what, to the
founders and all those faithful to them, appears as the unending glorious present.
A critique of foundationalism aims, in turn, at those political arrangements that,
having had radical beginnings, fell victim to the pathos of endurance and
truncated human action, referring to the capacity to make a new beginning (OR
85) — e.g., the French and Russian revolutions that deteriorated into the reign
of Terror — and, surreptitiously, at the phenomenological "principle of
principles," the primacy of presentive intuitions, levelling inner time
consciousness and, paradoxically, militating against the eidetic primacy of pure
possibilities. Beginnings, conversely, are the foundations of foundation, those
that un-found and un-ground it, rupturing the ideal continuity of the tradition
and revitalizing the capacity to being anew.14 If the reader permits me one final
piece of historical speculation (this time, related to personal history or
biography), Arendt's near romanticizing attachment to beginnings could be
seen as the survivor's response to a catastrophe, after which one is forced to start
again in the absence of foundations, hopelessly shattered in the course of the
war. Unlike the foundation that idolizes and aspires to immortalize a single and
singularly accomplished event, the beginning anticipates an infinite multiplicity
of events coextensive with the plurality of human existence and dotted with the
rifts and clefts of crises. 
When Arendt notes how "Rome's sanctification of foundation ... [was] a
unique event" (PP 54), she relates this both to the source of its political authority
and to the thought-event, whereby it definitively enshrined Greece as the cradle
of philosophical tradition. A philosophy and a politics that seek to furnish
foundations for themselves are self-sanctifying, whereas the critique of
foundations, a rigorous anti-foundationalism in theory and political practice,
has a profaning function.15 The doubling up of the beginning in natality,
unavailable for conscious appropriation, and in action participates in the critique
of foundationalism: the multiplication and superimposition of grounds is
peculiarly abyssal, as deconstruction has, on countless occasions, demonstrated.
Neither the unrepresentable past of natality nor the unpredictable future of
action is in a position to ground politics and thought, let alone to re-construct
the world with transcendental certainty. To make a beginning means
significantly more than to act; it is, above all, to be a beginning, to be suspended
in the abyss between past and future, as the title of Arendt's book intimate, and,
therefore, to be free.16 Existential grounds ought to be strictly distinguished
307

from substantive ones, so that ontological self-grounding, "being" a beginning,
would come into its own through a rigorous critique of foundationalism. Those
who are new beginnings, that is, those who exist — in the existential sense of
the term — find themselves in a perpetual crisis coextensive with their existence
and undiminished by the application of transcendental epoché. Existence does
not sanctify itself; on the contrary, it desacralizes itself, enacts an ongoing
critique of its own possibilities. 
Despite these correctives to the thought of Husserl, Arendt discovers in it a
wealth of critical resources for the understanding of politics, given that, in her
rendition, phenomenology is restyled into a critique of violence and of
totalitarianism. Both phenomena and logos are crucial for the success of this
critique. Logos, coded in terms of speech, acknowledges human plurality and
marks the beginning of politics, absent from acts of violence. Phenomena,
inherently admitting a multiplicity of modes of being accessed and interpreted,
are narrowed down to a single perspective under totalitarianism. If violence
and totalitarianism jointly result in the destruction of the world — if not of the
world's very worldhood — this is because they raze the conditions of possibility
for speech, for phenomenality, and for making new beginnings. Those subjected
to their deleterious effects are born into a worldless and eventless world, one
where the first beginning of natality is not doubled in action and where
phenomenology has no rightful place of its own.
In the Arendtian universe, speech must assert itself against an overwhelming
background of mute violence.17 Those who speak bring into being a shared
world, an ontological res publica that flourishes between the speakers. At any
moment, however, waves of unspeakable violence may flood the islands of
speech: similar to theories of social contract, mindful of the possibility that the
"mortal" political state is subject to dissolution and a return to the state of
nature, Arendt's political thought is attuned to the danger of leaving the space
of appearance and falling back into a mute confrontation. What is at stake in this
potential deterioration is not so much the collective organization of the state as
the phenomenological world, diminished by violence — for instance, that
emanating from torture — which negates speech. "Only sheer violence is mute"
(HC 26)18 and, therefore, it does not afford us access to phenomena, let alone
to a world shared with others. Phenomenology as the speaking out of
phenomena is always going to be on the other side of the barricades, fighting
against everything that frustrates the givenness of the world and whatever is
given in or through it. The logos of phenomenology will be synonymous with
the critique of violence, allied, in its essentially Greek provenance, with the
polis, which Arendt honors as "the most talkative of bodies politic" (HC 26).
In phenomenological terms, it was the most world-creating political entity,
although it brought about the death of Socrates, for reasons Arendt deems hardly
accidental. 
308

For the Greeks, "thought and action were considered to be coeval and
coequal, of the same rank and the same kind; and this originally meant...that
most political action, in so far as it remains outside the sphere of violence, is
indeed transacted in words ..." (HC 26). The first beginning in human natality
holds the promise of speech,19 but that promise will not be made good until the
second beginning in action announces itself. The precariousness of beginning
— thus, its eventfulness — hinges on the uncertainty that the transition from
natality to action would really come to pass and, if it does happen, that mute
violence would not despoil action and speech. The strength of logos is also its
weakness: weaving its web out of itself, without reliance on any externally
imposed foundations, it has nothing to fall back on but itself and, therefore, no
effective defense against violence. Existence, understood existentially, and its
accouterments, including speech, are ontically and, above all, ontologically
vulnerable.
But the Greek beginning, too, is ominously divided against itself, thrust into
an originary crisis. The opposing sides in this division are politics and
philosophy. The philosophical enterprise begins (and ends) in the state of
"speechless wonder," which "cannot be related in words because it is too
general for words" (PP 33), and, in this, it contravenes the most basic
constitution of the polis. By virtue of their very being, philosophers are excluded
from the political space of appearance. Instead of acting in the world in which
they appeared through biological birth, philosophers reinvent natality as such
and, born again into the world of Ideas, initially lose both vision and everyday
speech. They are the existential negation of everything that makes the polis
what it is, which is why, to defend itself, the polis eliminates the Ur-
philosopher, Socrates. So strikingly does speechless wonder resemble, at the
conceptual level, the apolitical muteness of violence that it is conflated,
wholesale, with the annihilation of logos.20
The wager of philosophical wonder is that, although it brings plentiful
contributions to the fight against the dogmatism of readymade opinions (PP
36), its suspension of logos, however temporary, runs the risk of emasculating
the critical impulse, as well. Phenomenology, conversely, does not flirt with
wonder bordering on mysticism, misguided attacks on the notion of eidetic
intuitions notwithstanding. Its "ideas" do not reside in the otherworldly realm
above phenomena; rather, they are extracted from the phenomena themselves.
Phenomenology is philosophy that exceeds its origin and scope, a philosophy
of plural, potentially infinite, modes of accessing phenomena included in the
things themselves. It is a political philosophy, not inasmuch as its content and
themes touch upon politics but inasmuch as it shares its most vital
underpinnings with the political workings of human pluralities. 
A further, more nuanced dividing line cuts across the thought of Socrates
and Plato, as Arendt argues in The Promise of Politics. Succinctly put,
309

according to her reconstruction of that fateful moment of ancient thought,
Socrates, not Plato, was a purely political philosopher, who recognized that
"there were as many different logoi as there are men" (PP 19); who was, by the
same token, much more attentive to the phenomena themselves and to endless
varieties of doxa that grant us access to phenomena;21 and who never had
enough of speaking to others. Since action is possible there where multiple,
dispersed beginnings are not gathered into the One, logos, too, is originarily
splintered into many competing logoi operating under the guise of doxic
knowledges. With this train of argumentation, presumably inspired by Socrates,
Arendt exposes not only the political consequences but also the inherently
political meaning of Husserl's doxic critique of episte¯me¯  and the attendant
vindication of everyday "mereness." If politics does not permit us to distinguish
between being and appearance (OR 88) — this, by the way, would not be a
symptom for the failure of critique but, to the contrary, for the honing of critical
thinking militantly resisting the metaphysical machinations of hypostatizing
something or someone separated from the world here-below — and if,
moreover, in the public realm, "appearance ... constitutes reality" (HC 50),
then phenomenology is the most suitable home for political thought and action. 
Plato must have recognized the danger of speechless wonder and, upon
recognizing it, resorted to fastidiously crafted analogies, mediations, and
reflections of eidetic light in the method he called "dialectic." The claim that he
"proposed to prolong indefinitely the speechless wonder which is at the
beginning and end of philosophy" (PP 36) is a crude exaggeration. After all, if
visible things, or everyday phenomena, are themselves the pale reflections and
signs of Ideas, from which they are not altogether divorced, then doxic
knowledge and colloquial logoi also cannot be dismissed in favor of speechless
wonder's "truth." This is not to mention that prolonging indefinitely that
condition which defines the beginning and the end of philosophy would have
prevented Plato from making the leap to the second beginning: from ideal
natality — rebirth from existence in the cave into the world of Ideas — to ideal
action, laying the grounds for a philosophical community. 
Throughout her writings, Arendt invests logos with the responsibility
analogous to that of the sovereign in Schmittian political philosophy: it must act
as the kath'echon, or the restrainer, deferring the possibility of apocalyptic
collapse that may befall, at any time, the instituted order and prompt the
disintegration of the world in violence.22 To Schmitt, ultimately conservative
sovereign violence is an acceptable measure meant to prevent such world-
dissolution. Arendt, on the other hand, advocates the renaissance of action that,
through speech, would be ready to make a fresh start and re-create the world.
This, then, is the sense in which she opposes power to violence: "Power is
actualized only where word and deed have not parted company, where words
are not empty and deeds not brutal, where words are not used to veil intentions
310

but to disclose realities, and deeds are not used to violate and destroy but to
establish relations and create new realities" (HC 200). An echo of Husserl's
critique of mere words, bloße Worte, this statement envisions critically
amplified logoi, still in touch with the phenomena they do not veil but
"disclose." That power which resists violence belongs to phenomenological
critique. 
The phenomenological genealogy of Arendt's thought thwarts, in the first
instance, its liberal appropriation for the purpose of defending contemporary
parliamentary democracies.23 Against such misreading, we ought to be
reminded how liberal parliamentarism spawns words that are empty and that
veil intentions, instead of disclosing the realities of the economic unevenness
they perpetuate. They are thoroughly divorced from action and it is no secret
that they would not have been allotted the space of utterance, were they potent
enough to inaugurate a new beginning. Preventing the achievement of our
appearance, they throw us back onto the nakedness of our first beginning — the
fragility and precariousness of natality — cut off from the second, world-
creating beginning of action. In the interrupted dialogue of the two beginnings,
natality thus remains without an answer, in a silence already heavy with
violence.24
The axiom that says, "violence, as distinguished from power, is mute;
violence begins where speech ends" (EU 308), lays a critical limit, internal to
phenomenology itself, and so relevant to the difficult relation of phenomena
and logos. A mute phenomenon is not a phenomenon. Nothing can be made to
appear, nothing will present itself, if it is silently forced to give itself to sight,
or is made available for manipulation. Wordless violence targets, besides a vast
majority of humans who are denied a meaningful voice on the political stage,
other living beings, be they animals or plants. The instrumentalizing character
of violence25 denies these beings their space of appearance, robs them of their
phenomenality. It would certainly be absurd to expect animals and plants to
speak in human voices, but does this absurdity imply that mute violence is the
destiny of our relation to them? If so, then these living beings have not yet
properly appeared and cannot appear at all. And yet, is it so far-fetched to
imagine human speech that would not be indifferent to them and that would
treat them as though they were partners in a conversation of the living? Would
it be out of the question to account for their unique possibilities and ways of
expression, spatial and otherwise, outlining the contours of their "speech"
without speaking? To act with plants and animals, rather than to labour or work
on them? Couldn't their natality (unlike mortality, no less authentic than ours)
appeal to ours and indicate a series of pathmarks to a qualitatively new
beginning, an open-ended action of instituting the broadest res publica yet?26
Arendt precludes this possibility, insofar as she, largely despite her own way of
thinking, subsumes natality under the sway of the human relation to death, the
311

knowledge that our beginning is the beginning of the end.27 But, assuming that
natality did not share in the somber finitude of mortality, its "joyful" finitude
could play a considerable role in the critical undermining of anthropocentrism.
Walter Benjamin's thesis on human language as a translation of the language
of things, heralding the redemption of nature, would then spell out the secret
meaning of the Arendtian phenomenology of nonviolence. 
The prologue to The Human Condition rehashes yet another Husserlian
critique of logos, one directed against formalized and mathematized natural
sciences that, having come into contact with existing cultural attitudes, urge us
to "adopt a way of life in which speech is no longer meaningful" (HC 4).
Arendt's criticism of modern scientific logos carries Husserl's theses to their
most radical conclusions: the chief effects of the digitalized "world where
speech has lost its power" are the growing worldlessness and disempowerment
of all those who rotate in its orbit (HC 4). The crisis of the sciences is, at bottom,
a political crisis, in that it robs us of our capacity to act, to make a new
beginning, to respond to the problem of natality, to be free, finally. Without
meaningful speech, the world is not a world; politics, inebriated with raw force,
is drained of power; phenomena cease to appear, to give themselves as what
they are. Pure violence reigns in the ideal reconstruction of things as the
material expressions of mathematical formulae and codes, while the search for
meaning is replaced with the postulation of objective truths independent of the
spoken logos. Intellectual work yields objective research outcomes (for
instance, having decoded yet another segment of an organism's DNA sequence)
that leave no breathing space for the non-actualizable, essentially incomplete
thinking indistinguishable from action. The quest for meaning, which used to
be "at the same time prompted and frustrated by our inability to originate
meaning" (EU 313), becomes, in and of itself, meaningless.
But logos is not alone in bearing the brunt of political violence;
phenomenality, likewise, falls victim to the onslaught of totalitarianism.
Incomprehensible to those who put their trust in the "objective approach" to
reality and its facts — the approach independent of the political condition under
which we access (or fail to access) phenomena — the decline of phenomenality
under totalitarianism has to do with the dismissal of perspectival knowledge and
the subsequent melting of dispersed beginnings into a single standpoint. Rather
than "new beginnings that had never before appeared and been seen in the world"
(PP 59), the subjects of totalitarianism are interchangeable, and, in keeping with
this dark political ideal, so are their perspectives on the world. Phenomena
continue to be given in the mode of adumbration befitting extended spatial
entities which we can access from a virtual infinity of perspectives. But if the
scatter of beginnings, characteristic of human plurality, is welded into one, then
the wealth of adumbrations will no longer matter and will undergo a de facto
ontological narrowing down under the pressure of political circumstances.28
312

Once again, phenomenology emerges as a champion of anti-totalitarian
thought and action, using the criteria postulated by Arendt herself. A method
attentive to the distinct modes of givenness of what appears, including the
multiple adumbrations of phenomena, it accommodates, without much effort,
a critique of totalitarianism. "...we know from experience," writes Arendt in
The Promise of Politics, "that no one can adequately grasp the objective world
in its full reality all on his own, because the world always shows and reveals
itself to him from only one perspective, which corresponds to his standpoint in
the world and is determined by it" (PP 128). An ensemble of adumbrations
emerges before us thanks to a free sharing of the world in and through speech
(PP 129), the action that effectively gives us the world in its ontological
richness. And where action is incapacitated, givenness itself is not given. Taken
together, these two ideas flesh out the sense of phenomenology as the co-
belonging of adumbrated phenomena and logos that amplifies their dimensions
in the space of appearance where what is spoken about co-appears with the
speakers themselves. Phenomenology, thus, precipitates an increase of being,
admitting infinite modes of givenness, perspectival adumbrations, and a
plurality of speakers into its midst.
Not so in the case of totalitarianism. Here, as in the fantasy of a purely
scientific grasp of what is, logos falls silent and the task of beginning is
forsaken. The dialogue between the two beginnings — between natality and
action — is broken off because the distance between and within the speakers,
who can no longer even be alone with themselves, gets erased, as they are
gathered into a unified whole. As these and other rifts disappear, so does the
space of appearance as such, which is why totalitarianism arrests the
"development of experience."29 Its rule is not only violence but also non-
givenness, the absolute withdrawal of the world. Nothing could be less
consistent with phenomenology than that.30 The crisis of beginnings, felt in their
factical dispersion and in the uncertain transition from natality to action, is
thrown into a much greater crisis of distances crossed, rifts mended, and the
evaporating power of critique, of distinguishing, of discerning, of judging, in the
archaic sense of krinein. Breaking with the vicious cycle of the crisis of/in crisis,
the promise of politics that keeps these in-between spaces open (and that,
through them, traffics the entire world) is the promise of phenomenology,
always prepared to accommodate a critique of totalitarianism.
It is worth noting that the critical model lurking in the background of
Arendt's thought has much in common with the classical Enlightenment
insistence on the enlargement of the public sphere. For Kant, the public use of
reason was a duty predicated not on formal-epistemological grounds but on
political-ontological ones: it was the obverse of his proscription of secrecy —
for instance, in the essay on "Perpetual Peace" — that shrouded the
capriciousness of absolutist rule emanating from a numinous will, a source of
313

power withdrawn from the world. (Political theology ensured the illicit
smuggling of secretive political authority into the list of metaphysical problems,
such as freedom and the nature of God, outside the limits of reason.) The
publicness of power, its phenomenality — if not utter transparency: the hope
and the normative ideal of the Enlightenment — would forestall precisely this
assault on reason.
Are we to infer from this that Arendt's political criticisms are of one piece
with those of the Enlightenment? Such an interpretation would be at odds with
the existentially vibrant space of appearance, where political subjects are
coming to light, without attaining anything like full transparency. In contrast to
the uniformity of Enlightenment rationality, their appearing is made possible in
the refracted medium of multiple logoi corresponding to the plurality of doxic
modes of accessing the world. Phenomenology is a critique of pure appearance
as much as it is a shunning of absolute nonappearance; the ground of the
political extends between these two idealities of pure presence and pure
absence.31
When Arendt contends that "the greatest that man can achieve is his own
appearance" (HC 208), she does not violate this simple political
phenomenological principle, provided that the achievement she invokes is of the
order of possibility, and, as such, belongs to experience without fulfillment,
without either presence or representation. The achievement of one's appearance,
existentially understood, suffers the most under totalitarian regimes that bring
to a naught the phenomenality of power along with meaningful speech and
action. In the secrecy of monarchical absolutism and royal court intrigues, one
at least knew whereto power had withdrawn, whereas totalitarianism thrives on
a constant displacement of power, such that even its withdrawal and
nonappearance are withdrawn and unapparent. The self-dissimulation of
totalitarian power is not comparable to Heidegger's ontological and eventful
"giving withdrawal," which, in keeping with the principles of phenomenology,
still left something behind: traces of being and the world as such. Totalitarian
nonphenomenality is purely negative: its "consistent arbitrariness" robs human
beings of the capacity to act (OT 433). Besides withholding its own appearance,
the elusive seat of totalitarian power annihilates the space of appearance, halts
the process of human self-phenomenalization in the second beginning, and,
with this, undercuts the very possibility of possibility. While violence wipes
out the world-creating effects of logos, totalitarianism dispenses with political
phenomena, properly so called. 
Methodologically, the non-self-givenness of totalitarianism poses a
seemingly irresolvable problem before phenomenological modes of
investigation. If one is supposed to follow the things themselves, if political
thought at its best discloses the articulations of the political phenomena
themselves and "remains bound to what appears in the domain of human
314

affairs" (OR 9), then one soon discovers that, in the case of totalitarianism,
there is nothing to follow because "the phenomenon, which we try — and must
try — to understand has deprived us of our traditional tools of
understanding"(EU 310). Its self-encryption makes it particularly immune to
critique, because the "object" to be criticized is too amorphous to be placed
within the limits of either logos or appearance. But this crisis of logos and
understanding, which, in the course of tackling totalitarianism, finds itself bereft
of anything "given" is, in its turn, productive of a more discerning critique that
necessitates a thoroughgoing self-critique: "...what is frightening in the rise of
totalitarianism is not that it is something new, but that it has brought to light the
ruin of our categories of thought and standards of judgment"(EU 318). The
non-givenness of totalitarian "phenomena" shifts the spotlight onto the subjects
of understanding, who have nothing to fall back on, save for a critique of their
method. It reveals the Gordian knot binding the understanding of
totalitarianism's origins and the understanding of this very understanding, the
requisite search for new beginnings in the self-critique of the subjects of
knowledge: "Even though we have lost the yardsticks by which to measure, ...
a being whose essence is beginning may have enough of origin within himself
to understand without preconceived categories ..." (EU 321). In other words,
the point is to bring the "origins within ourselves" into contact with the origins
of the withdrawn political phenomenon, in a short circuit of the event where the
promise (and the end) of the crisis would signal the beginning of critique.
Direct resistance to totalitarianism is unlikely to achieve its goal, because
one cannot act if one does not know where and how to make a start and because
what we resist keeps veiling itself and relocating elsewhere (OT 398ff). The
"permanent instability" of totalitarian movements (OT 391) that eschew rule-
bound delegation of authority is meant to safeguard their vitality in a parody of
existence, both negating political action and emulating its non-actualizable,
existential potential. In an illusion of constant self-reduction to the terminus ad
quem, which is the numinous will of the Leader, any visible power structure
may be miraculously endowed with this supreme authority and, just as
suddenly, be divested of it. Actual institutions are epiphenomenal, as opposed
to the true source of political life — this will, which engulfs and negates action
and speech proper to human multiplicities. A flurry of unexpected changes,
attributable to the arbitrariness of the noumenal entity, covers over the
totalitarian obstruction of everything conducive to event of politics. So much so
that the totalitarian Leader perverts Plato's insight in The Laws, to the effect that
"only the beginning (arche¯) is entitled to rule (archein)" (HC 224), into "only
the ruler is entitled to begin." The beginning no longer legitimates rulership, but
the ruler determines every new beginning, "isolated against others by his force"
(HC 189), itself devoid of logos or speech. "Isolated" by its own force, which
is not converted into power by means of political phenomenality and logos,
315

totalitarian leadership erodes the continuity required for the relation of leading-
and-following to take root. Its permanent crisis fills every lacuna still hospitable
to the emergence of critique, or to critique as the onto-phenomenological
emergence of a vital political order.
To a certain extent, the legacy of the totalitarian destruction of political
speech and phenomena is still with us. In 1954, in a lecture delivered at the
American Political Science Association's conference, when Arendt stated that
"[u]nder present circumstances, true action, namely, the beginning of something
new, seems possible only in revolutions" (EU 437),32 she obliquely invited her
audience to rethink the meaning of revolution. No longer referring to the
overthrow of the entire existing order, the new sense of the word is at once
more modest and more ambitious than its classical counterpart. It is more
modest because, due to the non-givenness of totalitarian phenomena, it is
pointless to search for the locus of "real power" that, if struck, would lead to the
domino effect of the system's collapse. In fact, power is largely absent from
the world governed by speechless violence and deprived of its worldhood.
Revolutionary action must strive, instead, to stimulate a proliferation of new
beginnings, the exceptional spaces of appearance that will punctuate and rupture
the seamlessness of the whole. But it is also more ambitious because it is not
satisfied with the actualization of its goals in a mere replacement of one regime
with another. Oriented by existential possibilities, such action invites a lasting
critique of violence and totalitarianism in all their guises. Creating new spaces
of appearance, it reaffirms, time and again, the ties that bind logos and
phenomena, without proclaiming their final identity, which would have resulted
in the stillness of an apolitical tautology.
Political phenomenological critique becomes creative, giving rise to a new
terrain of thought and, above all, action, in the same manner as Husserlian
critique was productive of the entire fields of transcendental consciousness and
eidetic phenomenology.33 The literally constitutional, constitution-making role
of revolutions is analogous to the objectivation of sensations or the constitution
of objectivity in the acts of consciousness. The sense of the world, including the
political pluriverse, is inseparable from who we are and what we do: if
revolutions recall us to beginnings, then they bring us back to ourselves, to the
beginnings that we are,34 re-activating the conditions of possibility for our very
subjectivity, not to mention for living and acting together. Every revolution is
a revolutionizing of the subject, and every subject — a potential revolution in
the making between the two beginnings of natality and action.35
Considered through the prism of constitutive political subjectivity, revolution
is an essentially modern event, the event of modernity as such, and, by the same
token, an event of or in phenomenology. Rather than appeal to the obscure
mystery of political beginnings, the act of revolutionary foundation finally
occurs "in broad daylight to be witnessed by all" (OR 197).36 Its sheer
316

phenomenality is consistent with the modern emphasis on publicness and
transparency, even if the revolutionary tradition itself, qua tradition, often
cloaks in myth the groundbreaking events it collects into a simple unity. Unless
it happens "in broad daylight," revolution will not have enough resources to
launch a critique of authoritarian political foundations, withdrawn from sight
and from understanding. Hence, for Arendt, a totalitarian revolution would be
an oxymoron, a contradiction in terms, which lumps together, unmediated, the
withdrawal and the exhibition of power. Whether or not the political foundation
is coming to appearance is the critical test, conducted under the aegis of
phenomenology, for the revolutionary nature of the founding event.
To put it differently, in revolutions, there is no place for a noumenal,
metaphysical entity or will, which would determine, from a hidden standpoint
above or behind the world here-below, the fateful events surrounding a new
beginning. Much in the same way that phenomenology refutes the existence of
the thing-in-itself as the transcendental cause of phenomena, Arendt's theory of
revolutions denies their orchestration by the nonapparent absolute, immune to
critical scrutiny and immanently historical analysis alike. "...it is futile," she
writes in On Revolution, "to search for an absolute to break the vicious circle
in which all beginning is inevitably caught, because this 'absolute' lies in the
very act of beginning itself" (OR 196). The eventful transcendence of
revolutionary beginnings takes place within historical immanence; the
constitution of meaning and objectivity transpires in the flux of psychic life.
The inclusion of the absolute "in the very act of beginning" does not set this act
apart from whatever might follow in its trail but exposes its own conditions of
possibility, akin to that modernist artwork which presents, as its content, the
materials that made it possible. 
The revelatory function of revolutionary action, exhibiting the beginning in
the light of phenomenality, challenges the prevailing view on the violent
origination of the political. Indeed, for Arendt's phenomenological theory to
work, the making-appear of demythologized revolutionary beginnings must
coincide with the putting into words (performance in logoi) of the new political
order. In legends, including the early modern conjectures of the state of nature,
"no beginning could be made without using violence, without violating," and
it is in a transgression of this unspoken law that "the first sentence of St. John,
'In the beginning was the Word'" had the air of salvation (OR 10). The logos
of muthos, which still teetered on the verge of speechless wonder, was
hospitable to a violent negation of speech. We ought to hear the complaint
Arendt voices against mythical beginnings phenomenologically: displaying the
beginning without excessive obscurity means letting it be and appear in the
medium of logos, as it does in the declaration, "We, the people..." And yet, the
violent residuum does not fade completely, if only because, in its modern
instantiation, it is sublimated into the symbolic sphere.37 Violence keeps the rift
317

between political phenomena and logos open — the problem is how to convert
its deadening, worldless hiatus into world-giving critique.
One hint for a possible solution has to do with Arendt's description of the
realm of violence as pervaded with unpredictability.38 Revolutionary events, too,
are arbitrary, insofar as the beginning is not determined by anything outside itself,
and it is this arbitrariness that serves as the invitation to violence. Nevertheless,
"what saves the act of beginning from its own arbitrariness is that it carries its own
principle within itself, or, to be more precise, that beginning and principle,
principium and principle, are not only related to each other, but are coeval. The
absolute from which the beginning is to derive its own validity...makes its
appearance in the world" (OR 205). What anchors political phenomenological
critique is the principle of the beginning, immanent to the beginning itself, against
which its "appearance in the world," that is to say, phenomenality, is to be
measured. But, in order to maintain together the principium and the principle,
jointly responsible for the (non-Hegelian) appearance of the absolute in the world,
the articulations of logos, in the shape of a tradition emanating from and carrying
forth the revolutionary beginning, are indispensible. The event must be suspended
between mechanistic predictability, on the one hand, and pure arbitrariness, on the
other, where "between" neither refers to a middle ground nor appeals to
moderation. No doubt, the revolutionary tradition will be in need of a constant de-
sedimentation, seeking to reactivate our capacity to begin. Its critique, incessantly
transmuting arbitrariness into the principle of freedom, is at the core of the
political relation between logos and phenomena: "As such, the principle inspires
the deeds that are to follow and remains apparent as long as the action lasts" (OR
205). But action does not last forever. The phenomenal appearance of the
revolutionary principle is finite, temporally circumscribed by its duration, that is,
by the deeds and words (the logoi) that follow the beginning both in fidelity and
in strict succession, which never really departs from what was begun. To
institutionalize this beginning is to violate the temporality of the political "things
themselves"; to accept its finitude is to acquiesce to the periodic — or, perhaps,
the final and definitive — "death" of the political. The drama of Arendt's political
phenomenology is that it is but a periphrastic reiteration of Samuel Beckett's
famous words: "we must begin, we cannot begin, we will begin"
The University of the Basque Country (UPV-EHU) & IKERBASQUE
References
1. Hannah Arendt, The Human Condition, Second Edition (Chicago & London: The University
of Chicago Press, 1998), 144. [This book is henceforth referred to as HC in the text and is
followed by relevant page numbers.]
2. Hannah Arendt, Thinking, in The Life of the Mind, Vol. 1 (New York & London: Harvest
Books, 1978), 56.
3. Anne O'Byrne recognizes the phenomenological underpinnings of natality, all the while
classifying them with a historical, rather than political, phenomenology [Natality and Finitude
(Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2010), 90].
318

4. It is questionable to what extent Arendt projected her own ideas regarding human beginnings
onto Augustinian thought. Cf. Stephen Kampowski, Arendt, Augustine, and the New
Beginning: The Action Theory and Moral Thought of Hannah Arendt in the Light of her
Dissertation on St. Augustine (Cambridge, UK & Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 2008), 47.
5. Emphasis mine.
6. Julia Kristeva's take is directly opposed to the critical phenomenological reading of Arendt.
Kristeva ignores the fracturing of logos even at the heart of the "self" and, instead, attributes
to it a unifying function, so that the Arendtian Selbst "welds together the phenomenon and the
logos." [Hannah Arendt. Trans.  Ross Guberman (New York: Columbia University Press,
2001), 173.]
7. Hannah Arendt, The Promise of Politics. Ed. Jerome Kohn (New York: Schocken Books,
2005), 24-5. [This book is henceforth referred to as PP in the text and is followed by relevant
page numbers.]
8. The difference between the two beginnings—roughly, the material and the ideal—goes a long
way to assuage the worries of Adriana Cavarero, for whom "Arendt does not highlight the
concept of birth as a coming from the mother's womb, but accepts the Greek meaning of birth
as a coming from nothing." [In Spite of Plato: A Feminist Re-Writing of Ancient Philosophy
(New York: Polity, 1995), 6.]
9. Hannah Arendt, Essays in Understanding, 1930-1954. Ed. Jerome Kohn (New York &
London: Harcourt Brace & Co., 1994), 165. [This book is henceforth referred to as EU in the
text and is followed by relevant page numbers.]
10. On the violence of instrumentality in Arendt, see James Dodd, Violence and Phenomenology
(Oxon & New York: Routledge, 2009), 63ff.
11. This is probably what Elisabeth Young-Bruehl means when she write that "[f]or Arendt,
temporality, far from having to be overcome for man to be, is the source of possibility for
action, in which his being is intensified." [Hannah Arendt: For Love of the World. Second
Edition (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2004), 495.] 
12. According to Arendt's analysis in On Revolution, the Roman senate incarnated the authority
of the ancestors who founded the City of Rome [Hannah Arendt, On Revolution (London &
New York: Penguin Books, 2004), 193. This book is henceforth referred to as OR in the text
and is followed by relevant page numbers.]
13. Hannah Arendt, Between Past and Future: Eight Exercises in Political Thought (New York
and London: Penguin Books, 1978), 167.
14. It is, therefore, inaccurate to claim, as Kampowski does, that foundation is "a paradigm of a
new beginning." Cf. Kampowski, Arendt, Augustine, and the New Beginning, 151ff.
15. On Arendt's anti-foundationalism, see Serena Parekh, Hannah Arendt and the Challenge of
Modernity: A Phenomenology of Human Rights (New York and London: Routledge, 2008),
36ff.
16. Arendt constructs this argumentative chain in Between Past and Future, 167. Cf., also, EU 322.
17. Cf. the chapter on Arendt in Dodd, Violence and Phenomenology, as well as Dana Villa
["Introduction: The Development of Arendt's Political Thought." In The Cambridge
Companion to Hannah Arendt. Ed. Dana Villa (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2001)] who concludes that Arendt's "fears concerning the way this carefully built up world
might be swamped by the forces of cultural barbarism..." (5)  
18. This is also the key point of Elaine Scarry's influential The Body in Pain: The Making and
Unmaking of the World (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1987).
19. Noam Chomsky's "universal grammar" attests to this fact.
20. On Arendt's suspicion of excessive "speechless wonder," see Mary-Jane Rubenstein, Strange
Wonder: The Closure of Metaphysics and the Opening of Awe (New York: Columbia
University Press, 2008), 20ff.
21. Doxa designates, for Arendt, the way in which the world opens up for us (PP 23), the way
things look or appear from a certain position in the world (PP 29) and, hence, something of
eidos—not only the "Idea" but also the look or the image of things. 
319

22. On the question of sovereignty in Arendt and Schmitt, consult Charles Barbour, "Exception
and Event: Schmitt, Arendt, and Badiou," in After Sovereignty: On the Question of Political
Beginnings. Eds. Charles Barbour and George Pavlich (New York & Oxon: Routledge, 2010),
83-96.
23. See, for example, Margie Lloyd, "In Tocqueville's Shadow: Hannah Arendt's Liberal
Republicanism." The Review of Politics, 57, Winter 1995, 31-58.
24. Two brief quotations from Hannah Arendt, "On Violence" [in Crises of the Republic (New
York & London: Harcourt Brace & Co., 1972)] are in order here. 1) "...to act is the human
answer to the condition of natality" (179); and 2) "glorifications of violence are caused by
severe frustration of the faculty of action in the modern world." (180)
25. Dodd, Violence and Phenomenology, 53.
26. This is in line with the suggestion made by Michel Serres in his recent Temps des Crises
(Paris: Le Pommier, 2009).
27. Hannah Arendt, Willing, in The Life of the Mind, Vol. 2 (New York & London: Harcourt
Brace & Co., 1978), 109.
28. This is what Jacques Rancière will later have in mind when he introduces the term "aesthetic
regime" into his political philosophy.
29. Hannah Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism (Cleveland & New York: Meridian Books,
1964), 409. [This book is henceforth referred to as OT in the text and is followed by relevant
page numbers.]
30. Hence, it is questionable whether one can talk about Arendt's "phenomenology of
totalitarianism," as Seyla Benhabib does, even allowing for the negative modification of
phenomenological concepts in totalitarian "worldlessness" and "loneliness." Cf. Seyla
Benhabib, The Reluctant Modernism of Hannah Arendt (Oxford & Lanham: Rowman and
Littlefield, 2000), 69.
31. The "invisible visibility" of the political resonates with the insights of the early Schmitt,
especially in his Roman Catholicism and the Political Form (1923). 
32. For a background analysis of Arendt's thinking of revolution, refer to Albrecht Wellmer,
"Arendt on Revolution," In The Cambridge Companion to Hannah Arendt. Ed. Dana Villa
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001), 220-244.
33. Of course, Arendt did not subscribe to Husserl's transcendental method in toto. But neither
did she swap transcendental philosophy for an uncritical "naturalization of thought." Her
rejection of speechless wonder does not automatically entail a dismissal of exceptional and
quasi-miraculous events such as revolution and, indeed, thinking itself. It is, therefore,
blatantly wrong to assert that in a "reverse normalization of Husserl's hyperbolic stance,
Arendt has naturalized philosophizing itself. Philosophy is natural to us, like breathing." [Max
Deutscher, Judgment After Arendt (Hampshire and Burlington, 2007), 15.]
34. "beginning is not the same as the beginning of the world; it is not the beginning of something
but of somebody, who is a beginner himself." (Arendt, Human Condition, 177)
35. On the bond between modern subjectivity and revolution, including in the political theory of
Arendt, refer to Artemy Magun, La Révolution Négative: Déconstruction du Sujet Politique
(Paris: L'Harmattan, 2009).
36. The coming-to-light of political phenomenality is not a passage between "the noumenal and
the phenomenal worlds," into which Anthony Cascardi ["Communication and Transformation:
Aesthetics and Politics in Kant and Arendt," in Hannah Arendt and the Meaning of Politics.
Eds. Craig Calhoun and John McGowan (Minneapolis: The University of Minnesota Press,
1997)] transforms it under the influence of a Kantian reading of Arendt (110). A mediation
between noumena and phenomena would, strictly speaking, correspond to a reconciliation of
totalitarianism and radical democracy.
37. This is the point of Jacques Derrida's "Violence and Metaphysics" (1967), as well as, more
pertinently, of his essay "Declarations of Independence" (1986).
38. Arendt, "On Violence," 107.
320

