British Journal of Educational Studies
ISSN: 0007-1005 (Print) 1467-8527 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rbje20
HEGELIAN BILDUNG AS AN ALTERNATIVE TO
ACTIVE LEARNING IN CHILDHOOD EDUCATION
Saeed Azadmanesh & Khosrow Bagheri Noaparast
To cite this article: Saeed Azadmanesh & Khosrow Bagheri Noaparast (2023) HEGELIAN
BILDUNG AS AN ALTERNATIVE TO ACTIVE LEARNING IN CHILDHOOD EDUCATION, British
Journal of Educational Studies, 71:2, 195-212, DOI: 10.1080/00071005.2022.2054940
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00071005.2022.2054940
Published online: 25 Mar 2022.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 410
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rbje20

HEGELIAN BILDUNG AS AN ALTERNATIVE TO ACTIVE 
LEARNING IN CHILDHOOD EDUCATION
by SAEED AZADMANESH
, Philosophy of Education, Allameh Tabataba'i 
University, Tehran, Iran and KHOSROW BAGHERI NOAPARAST
, Philosophy of 
Education, University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran
ABSTRACT: This study aims to critique the concept of active learning in 
childhood education based on Hegelian Bildung. We have defined child­
hood education from the perspective of Hegel's Bildung in The 
Phenomenology of Spirit. We describe childhood education as a 'primary 
Bildung' having the aim of 'entering into the conceptual world'. This aim 
indicates that children can and are required to express their experiences in 
conceptual language. Finally, we critique the conceptual components of 
active learning from the Hegelian point of view and suggest three alter­
native components: 'child-educator interaction', 'understanding historical 
knowledge', and 'addressing concrete-abstract affairs.' We suggest that the 
concept of active learning needs to be replaced by 'Communicative- 
Interactive Learning (CIL)'. CIL takes both objectivity and subjectivity 
into account during the process of knowledge formation in education.
Keywords: Hegel's Phenomenology, Bildung, Childhood Education, 
Interaction, Active Learning, Communicative-Interactive Learning (CIL)
INTRODUCTION
Childhood is of special importance in education due to its significant influence 
in shaping an individual's personality. With the unique work of thinkers such as 
Rousseau, John Dewey, and Jean Piaget, childhood has come to be considered 
as a distinct period from adulthood.1 This distinction has led to a duality in 
education. While traditional education emphasizes upon the authority of the 
teacher and knowledge and advocates that the legacy of human reason be passed 
on to children, child-centered approaches mainly take children's freedom and 
interests into consideration and seek to guide children in learning certain social 
skills and ultimately some parts of knowledge. This duality can be seen as 
a continuum in which the teacher's absolute authority lies on one side and the 
absolute freedom of the child on the other. Nevertheless, we see today that 
child-centeredness and active learning have been strengthened as a response to 
traditional education. The child-centeredness is an aspect of the national 
This article has been republished with minor changes. These changes do not impact the 
academic content of the article. 
British Journal of Educational Studies                                           
Vol. 71, No. 2, 2023, pp. 195-212
ISSN 0007-1005 (print)/ISSN 1467-8527 (online) 
© 2022 Society for Educational Studies 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00071005.2022.2054940 
http://www.tandfonline.com

curriculum of the early years. The literature on this subject indicates that the 
center of child-centered education is the concept of active learning 
(Pierlejewski, 2020). In this regard, approaches such as Montessori Method 
(Association Montessori Internationale, 2018), HighScope (2021), and child- 
friendly projects have been welcomed, and active learning has increasingly 
attracted the attention of educationalists in the world (Morrison, 2004). 
'Active learning' is one of the basic concepts that is used to organize educa­
tional activities by focusing on the child's interest. Some scholars believe that 
the main role of contemporary education is to pursue active learning as main 
means of education (Diković & Gergorić, 2020).
In this research, we intend to critique and reconstruct the concept of active 
learning based on Hegel's idea of Bildung in childhood education.2 Our theore­
tical framework is Bildung in Hegel's Phänomenologie des Geistes (The 
Phenomenology of Spirit).3 In this book, Hegel expresses his theory of the 
formation of knowledge, which can provide a basis for education. It seems 
that Hegel's work enables us to look at essential concepts such as the nature of 
knowledge and the logic of its formation, which play a serious role in drawing 
the concept of childhood education logically; because one of the basic compo­
nents for defining education is the definition of the knowledge and the logic of 
its formation. Hegel's philosophy has provided an influential metaphysics for 
some important thinkers such as Vygotsky and Dewey. Even today, researchers 
follow Hegel's views in education, including Stojanov (2018), Tubbs (1996, 
2005, 2008, 2014, 2017), Sørensen (2015), Somr (2013), Jessop (2012), Lilge 
(1974), and Odenstedt (2008).
In what follows, we first attempt to define Hegelian Bildung in childhood. 
Next, the components of active learning are described, and finally, according 
to the Bildung definition in childhood education, we critique the components 
of active learning and introduce alternative components and approach.
CHILDHOOD EDUCATION AS A PRIMARY BILDUNG
Broadly speaking,4 Bildung as introduced in The Phenomenology of Spirit is the 
process of knowledge formation that develops from natural needs to the rational 
life.5 This idea of Bildung is comprised of three steps. The first step is to 
comprehend a general conception of the object concerned. The second step is 
to understand only through reasoning and using universal concepts. Finally, the 
third step consists of judging the concrete and the particular. Referring to this 
point, Hegel states:
The beginning both of cultural education and of working one's way out of the 
immediacy of substantial life must always be done by acquainting oneself with 
universal principles and points of view. Having done that, one can then work 
oneself up to the thought of what is at stake and, of no less importance, to giving 
reasons for supporting or refuting one's thoughts on those matters. One must grasp 
196            
HEGELIAN BILDUNG IN CHILDHOOD EDUCATION           

the subject matter's concrete and rich fullness according to its determinateness, 
and one must know both how to provide an orderly account of it and to render 
a serious judgment about it. (Hegel, 2018, p. 5). 
Here, Hegel considers the departure from an initial and immediate state of 
consciousness to achieve a conceptual state. Knowledge obtained from an 
immediate experience (i.e., by chance and imperfection) cannot satisfy reason. 
It is only through the mediation of concepts that reason can be satisfied (Hegel, 
2018, p. 10). Accordingly, education first breaks down the immediacy of an 
individual's experience by connecting the individual to other people in order to 
achieve a higher moment through speculative activity (Odenstedt, 2008). Wood 
(1998) explains that what we are familiar with is different from rational cogni­
tion. For achieving rational cognition, it is necessary that people lose their 
familiarity with an object and then reclaim it by gaining a conceptual under­
standing. As a result, what was immediate and familiar at the beginning is now 
understood through a universal concept produced by reason.
Given the general account of Bildung, education has three fundamental 
steps. First, children perceive a conception of what they have - the given - and 
somehow find themselves in it. In the second step, they attempt to understand 
and justify the given through reasoning and by appealing to universal con­
cepts. In this step, the importance of other people is noteworthy for the 
individual to understand and justify the universal concepts. Finally, through 
conceptual reasoning and paying attention to particulars, the reconciliation 
with the given can be achieved universally. This process will continue end­
lessly, i.e., the new understood concept will continue the previous process and 
reach a conceptual reconciliation again by sublation (Aufhebung). In this 
regard, Hegel states, 'To be sure, spirit is never to be conceived as being at 
rest but rather as ever-advancing' (Hegel, 2018, p. 9). Tubbs (2008) explains 
that the truth, according to Hegel, is forced to relearn about itself from itself 
because of its inner and liberating force. Thus, sublation expresses this unrest 
and developing truth, which continuously absorbs previous steps in itself. 
Such education will develop the students' understanding of the world in 
which they live by means of concept formation in relation to other people. 
As a result, students will always be aware of the inadequacy of their thoughts 
and would learn and follow the Bildung process in all their thoughts and 
affairs; understanding this inadequacy occurs in relation to the other and the 
unfamiliar.
Between 1808-1816, Hegel was acting as the rector of the Gymnasium in 
Nürnberg. In this practical context, Hegel (1984) explicitly discusses Bildung 
and its relationship to education. He acknowledges the importance of alienation 
for Bildung as he emphasizes in the chapter of the Spirit -spirit alienated from 
itself- in The Phenomenology of Spirit. Hegel in his Gymnasium works states 
that this alienation is pursued through encountering the classic works in curri­
culum as a medium of Bildung (Stojanov, 2018, p. 37; Somr, 2013). This 
HEGELIAN BILDUNG IN CHILDHOOD EDUCATION            
197

alienation separates us from our natural and immediate nature so that confronts 
us with the other and the unfamiliar that is necessary for understanding inade­
quacy in Bildung. Therefore, the process of familiarity and alienation is con­
stantly developing in education through this interaction.
Our account is consistent with the two characteristics of Bildung according 
to Jessop (2012)- namely being 'relational' and 'developmental' (p. 294)- but 
does not accept the third characteristic, i.e., being 'conflictual', because he 
writes: 'for Hegel, contradictions or conflicting opinions are necessary to the 
process of development' (p. 294). However, Bildung or education, in terms of 
The Phenomenology of Spirit, does not necessarily occur when children face 
conflicts. We are not talking about the triple of thesis, antithesis, and synthesis 
here6; what is meant here is that understanding inadequacy leads to organic 
development. Hence, as Tubbs (2005) says, the notion of sublation (Aufhebung) 
is more appropriate to explain Hegelian Bildung. For Hegel, the development of 
knowledge is based on inadequacy. As a result of its organic nature, knowledge 
moves towards its purpose, which is potentially within itself: 'The organic does 
not engender something, it only conserves itself, or what is engendered is, as it 
is engendered, just as much already present.' (Hegel, 2018, p. 152). However, 
the organic nature of consciousness in The Phenomenology of Spirit is 
a description of the general consciousness or Spirit, and the individual con­
sciousness grows by relating to this general consciousness through the other, 
history, and environment. This interaction is necessary for understanding the 
inadequacy of one's self. Therefore, Bildung/education as an organic process 
needs inadequacy, not necessarily conflict, as a prerequisite. The relationship 
with others is not necessarily conflictual but helps children understand their own 
inadequacy. Although the source of inadequacy can be external, the inadequacy 
itself is internal. During their interaction with others, children realize the 
inadequacy of their thought and look for an alternative. This alternative is not 
necessarily a synthesis derived from the contradiction between a thesis and an 
antithesis. It is rather the child's understanding of a kind of inner inadequacy.
Childhood education based on Hegelian Bildung does not need a different 
account from the general process of education in adulthood. Nevertheless, what 
distinguishes childhood education from the general account is its aim and its 
detailes in terms of the specific characteristics of childhood. In other words, the 
formal structure of education is the same, but its internal content is different in 
different phases of education as we will explain it further below. Therefore, in 
Hegelian Bildung, childhood education also deals with the three aforementioned 
steps. The first step is the child's initial and naive familiarity with objects, i.e., 
a kind of general perception. Next, the child is confronted with the views of 
others and doubts and thinks about the given as a reaction. In fact, it is in this 
step that children make a distinction between the subject and the object for the 
first time and consider themselves different from other people as a result. 
Finally, in the third step, the child attempts to synthesize the abstract and the 
primary concrete, and this process continues endlessly.
198            
HEGELIAN BILDUNG IN CHILDHOOD EDUCATION           

Odenstedt (2008) also recognizes these three steps as follows. The first step 
comprises of 'unreflected unity with one's natural state.' The second step consists 
of 'alienation from one's natural state induced by otherness,' and the third step is 
'reflective reconciliation between self and other' (p. 562). However, given that 
reason is not fully formed in children and children are constantly developing 
quantitatively and qualitatively (Hegel, 2018, p. 9), they cannot understand the 
universal. Therefore, Bildung in childhood is at its primary level, which leads us to 
refer to childhood education as 'primary Bildung,' as opposed to the 'grown 
Bildung' considered as the definition of general education at the beginning of this 
section. In other words, the form and structure of Bildung, namely its three steps, 
can be traced back to childhood education, but it is different from the grown 
Bildung qualitatively and quantitatively. Primary Bildung is distinguished by its 
aim to recognize the child's limitations; So, unlike the grown Bildung, we use 'soft 
alienation' instead of 'acute alienation' (Sørensen, 2015) to show its inadequacy.
THE AIM OF CHILDHOOD EDUCATION: ENTERING INTO THE  
CONCEPTUAL WORLD
With regard to the process of knowledge formation in Hegel's The 
Phenomenology of Spirit (Hegel, 2018), the end of consciousness is the absolute 
knowing (Das absolute Wissen). At this moment, consciousness continues its 
activity as absolute knowing, which is dynamic and alive. It communicates with 
the absolute in the form of the concept (Begriff). The best way to know the 
absolute is philosophy. According to Hegel, philosophy incorporates all pre­
vious moments, including religion and art, and contains the entire history of 
philosophy. The absolute knowing is the end, and consciousness is immersed in 
its activity by relying on the concept and reasoning. It continues its activity as 
an open-end moment. Thus, Hegel states:
The moments of its movement no longer exhibit themselves in that movement as 
determinate shapes of consciousness; rather, as the difference in consciousness has 
returned into the self, the moments exhibit themselves as determinate concepts and 
as the organic self-grounded movement of these concepts. (Hegel, 2018, p. 465). 
For Hegel, this conceptual knowledge must be rational and intersubjective: 
'To achieve rational knowledge through our own intellect is the rightful demand 
of a consciousness which is approaching the status of science' (Hegel, 2018, 
p. 10). What makes consciousness an absolute knowing is the process of 
reasoning and reaching general concepts. In this type of knowledge, individual­
ity is ignored, and only the law of the universe rules:
The law is the essential, and individuality is to be sublated, and therefore to be 
sublated in its consciousness as well as in the way of the world. In the former, 
one's own individuality is to be brought under the discipline of the universal, or of 
the good and true in itself. (Hegel, 2018, p. 220). 
HEGELIAN BILDUNG IN CHILDHOOD EDUCATION            
199

Consequently, the child needs some preparations to have a conceptual view 
of the world. First, the child needs to be well acquainted with the culture, 
values, and norms of the society through his or her family to be able to look 
at these particular issues through abstraction. After the family, it is the educa­
tional institutions that help children enter the conceptual world and rationalize 
concepts appropriate to their abstract understanding. 'Entering into the concep­
tual world' as the aim of childhood education means children can express all 
issues of consciousness in a conceptual language at the end of childhood 
education. In other words, they have learned that they should give and ask for 
reasons to all concrete and abstract phenomena they encounter, ranging from 
trivial daily problems to more abstract subjects. What is meant by concept here 
is not the comprehensive or final concept (Begriff) (Hegel, 2018) but the 
abstract concept that is obtained by separating the subject from the object and 
studying the subject based on it. Here, it is enough for children to engage in 
a pre-process in relation to all the topics, including interests, ideas, beliefs, and 
sciences, in the form of reasons and arguments to think about. This conceptua­
lization occurs in the context of children's concrete life, and children's direct 
experiences provide them with this context quite well. Without having these 
direct experiences, the issue of conceptualization is essentially eliminated. 
Entering into the conceptual and rational world does not necessarily mean that 
one's arguments are logically valid and sound; in fact, it merely requires 
learning the relevant rules. As Allen (1946) states, in childhood education, 
Hegel emphasizes upon educating the mind and its development, which is 
achieved through the interaction of the mature and the immature mind.
Entering into the conceptual world as the aim of childhood education may 
be considered as a kind of the game of giving and asking for reasons as 
expressed by Brandom (2000). Inspired by Hegel, Brandom introduces the 
human being as a rational being who manifests rationality in linguistic discourse 
using the concept. He attempts to explain how linguistic expressions in the 
game of giving and asking for reasons lead to the creation of conceptual content 
as a result of our language being inferentially articulated. Brandom's inferenti­
alism means that for understanding the meaning of a concept or proposition, one 
needs to connect a proposition with related concepts and propositions. 
Therefore, Brandom states that to clarify something is to conceptualize it. In 
this game, the child first understands the correct meaning of the concepts by 
understanding the relevant inferential web and then develops the concepts 
through this connection. This conceptualization has two aspects. The first 
consists of a dynamic process that emanates from the child's imagination and 
is not intended here. The second comprises of a logical and necessary process 
and is significant in relation to the inferential web. For example, when children 
hold that something is black, they cannot simultaneously take it to be white. 
This is a logical and necessary requirement of getting through the inferential 
web. The role of the educator is vital here to guide this game of giving and 
asking for reasons. Entering into the conceptual world as the aim seeks to 
200            
HEGELIAN BILDUNG IN CHILDHOOD EDUCATION           

institutionalize the rule of conceptualization, which is a kind of giving and 
asking for reasons in childhood. In this giving and asking for reasons, the 
essential thing is that children, working with the conceptual web, achieve the 
inference of concepts from other concepts. For example, when encountered with 
the statement 'this flower is red,' children should be able to conceptualize 
statements such as 'this flower is not yellow,' 'this flower is not green,' and 
'this flower is the same color as blood' as a result.
A CRITIQUE AND RECONSTRUCTION OF THE COMPONENTS OF ACTIVE 
LEARNING
Active learning broadly refers to pedagogical methods in which students work 
actively and think about what they do. Wolfe (2006) describes active learning as 
a learning approach in which 'students learn by doing something' (p. 77). 
Accordingly, 'construction of individual mental abilities is done in active 
encounters with the real world' (Hornstein, 2007, p. 89). Active learning 
encompasses a wide range of educational activities that emphasize upon student 
activity. But in this study, the meaning of active learning is its radical account, 
which is explained below. In active learning, children experiment, interact, and 
costruct knowledge themselves. The educator just has to provide opportunities 
for their play and experiment. The main mode of this learning is play. Child- 
centered play is initiated and directed by the child. It is not planned and guided 
by the educator for a specific educational purpose. The educator's role is only to 
provide opportunities for free play (Pierlejewski, 2020). Given this account, 
there are three basic components of active learning: Child-centeredness, con­
structivism, and child's manual activity. In what follows, we critique and 
reconstruct these components according to the idea of childhood education in 
Hegelian Bildung. We propose the three alternative components as 'child- 
educator interaction,' 'understanding historical knowledge,' and 'addressing 
concrete-abstract affairs,' respectively. In addition, we suggest 'communicative- 
interactive learning' as an alternative to active learning. It is worth noting that 
the introduction of alternative components here is a kind of reconciliatory 
sublation (Aufhebung), resulting from the inadequacies of the active learning 
components as well as the inadequacy of the concept of active learning itself. In 
order to better understand this reconciliatory sublation and its significance, the 
antithesis of each component is also discussed. So, 'communicative-interactive 
learning' based on Hegelian Bildung is a type of active learning that has its own 
components and sublates active learning as explained below.
Child-Educator Interaction Vs. Child-Centeredness
Active learning in childhood education is closely related to the centrality of 
childhood (Pierlejewski, 2020). It has emerged after expressing the importance 
HEGELIAN BILDUNG IN CHILDHOOD EDUCATION            
201

of childhood education and its differences with education in adulthood. In fact, 
child-centered education is the origin and basis of active learning. The origin of 
child-centered education can be traced back to Rousseau. Relying on nature and 
its laws, Rousseau (1979) considers the right way of education to be the way of 
nature. He argues that the first task of an educator is to know the child and the 
natural rules of development. Rousseau emphasizes that there are fundamental 
differences between a child and an adult; thus, one should not judge a child by 
looking at an adult. Although the child-centered education can be traced back to 
Rousseau, he does not represent active learning as it is criticized in this study.
Inspired by Rousseau's naturalism and the implications of qualitative differ­
ences between children and adults, academic scholars and researchers in the field 
of education have developed theories and models that are supposedly appropriate 
to the child's nature. Meanwhile, the works of thinkers such as Dewey in 
philosophy of education and Piaget in psychology are noteworthy. Their research 
has significantly increased our knowledge about child's nature and active learning 
(Barrow and Woods, 2006, p. 117). It is worth mentioning that although Dewey 
(1997) was a pioneer in developing experiential learning and education, which is 
the basis for active learning, he (Dewey, 2001) also emphasizes upon the impor­
tance of connecting with the community and cultural experiences for achieving 
educational aims. So, the child's immediate interests are not the final determi­
nants. However, this does not mean that Dewey's view is based on Hegelian 
Bildung; rather, it simply points out the particularities of Dewey's thought. After 
Dewey, however, children's experience and interest in education were considered 
central and vital in Progressive Education (Nelson, 2007).
Active learning in the modern age has a strong child-centered tendency. 
Important features of child-centeredness are explained as follows. Firstly, 
children engage in activities rooted in their interests and intentions. 
Secondly, children get to decide what materials (available in their educational 
setting) to play with and activities to undertake (Hohmann and Weikart, 1995). 
Thirdly, children observe and evaluate by participation in learning. The essen­
tial thing in observing and evaluating is the child's active perception and 
interpretation of what is being observed. Finally, children have a relatively 
high degree of freedom, pursued through activities in projects and games 
(Morrison, 2004).
As mentioned earlier, the learning process in active learning begins with 
children's experiences and desires. What is emphasized upon in this approach is 
to focus on children and their interests, beliefs, and decisions. Not only are the 
children's interests the starting point of educational activities but they also 
determine the path of future learning. The role of children is decisive because 
it is taken to organize the learning process. Moreover, the teacher's role is 
reduced to a facilitator (Cattaneo, 2017, pp. 145-146). Biesta (2012) uses the 
term 'learnification' concerning views that reduce education to learning. He 
holds that teaching is marginalized in these perspectives, and the teacher's role 
is considered as a facilitator.
202            
HEGELIAN BILDUNG IN CHILDHOOD EDUCATION           

This point of view on childhood education and knowledge formation needs 
to be criticized because the children's role is considered essential in child- 
centered education at the expense of undermining the legacy of human reason; 
the profound experiences of human reason are more or less ignored in this 
approach, because what is central to education is the child's own trial and error. 
So, the educator is only a facilitator, not a transmitter of human knowledge. 
While educators should take children's interests into account, they can provide 
children with some of the important achievements of human reason. The main 
point is that in child-centered approaches, the aim of education originates from 
situational desires and interests of children; Dewey (2001) describes them as 
aims that arise from the free growth of children's own experiences (p. 105). 
However, as Kane (2004) argues, alongside the element of method in active 
learning, the teacher's mediating role should also be considered vital. Due to the 
critical role of teacher/educator in transferring the knowledge and the legacy of 
human 
reason, 
teacher-centered/adult-centered 
education 
appeared 
as 
a powerful concept that has been practiced as a tradition for many centuries. 
Teacher-centeredness, despite having its own inadequacies, can be taken as 
a thesis to which the student-centered/child-centered approach appeared as an 
antithesis. However, a synthesis can be achieved through a combination of these 
two perspectives, as explained below in more detail.
In Hegel's idea of childhood education, children's interests, beliefs, and 
cognition are not central (Stojanov, 2018; Tubbs, 2008; Wood, 1998). This 
point of view supports an interactive conception in education. Hegelian 
Bildung is formed in connection with two kinds of self-consciousness (Hegel, 
2018), which gives Hegelian education an interactive and social aspect 
(Stojanov, 2018, p. 27). Hegel explains this under the concept of recognition 
(Anerkennen) in the section of 'Mastery and Servitude' (Herrschaft und 
Knechtschaft) in this way: 'Self-consciousness is in and for itself while and as 
a result of its being in and for itself for an other; i.e., it is only as a recognized 
being' (Hegel, 2018, p. 108). Accordingly, education deals with a consciousness 
which is intertwined with other people and as Westphal (2003) states, it has 
a social and interactive nature (p. 60). In this view, interests and beliefs are 
essential as a starting point in education and should be recognized. However, it 
does not mean that they direct the path and process of education. The role of the 
educator/adult in this orientation is revealed. Given the aim of education in 
childhood, namely entering into the conceptual world, the educator helps chil­
dren look at their interests and beliefs through abstraction and concept and state 
their reasons for their choices.
In this regard, Kane (2004) describes teacher's role in active learning as 
follows: 'I have argued that in any given situation the success of an active 
learning methodology depends not on the methodology alone but, ultimately, on 
the ever-evolving, the dialectical relationship between methodology and lear­
ners, mediated by the educator' (p. 285). For Kane, the teacher's role is 
equivalent to that of a mediator between methods and learners and it is finally 
HEGELIAN BILDUNG IN CHILDHOOD EDUCATION            
203

reduced to a kind of facilitation. In contrast, the teacher is more than a facilitator 
in Hegelian interaction. Due to their rich experience and knowledge, teachers 
can provide students not only with methods but also with contents in terms of 
knowledge, norms, and values. In other words, this type of interaction deals 
with 'what to learn' in addition to 'how to learn.' This maximal interaction 
distinguishes Hegelian view from child-centered approaches, which consist of 
a minimal child-educator interaction known as facilitation. The educator's rich 
knowledge and experience help children to gain insight and thereby avoid 
countless possible mistaken ways and take a better direction in education. 
Child needs to be aware of the history of knowledge by the educator in order 
to understand it. The knowledge goes moment by moment and has a history and 
cannot be obtained instantly. So, intersubjectivity should be recognized in child- 
educator interaction. Of course, this interaction in education does not mean an 
absolute immunity from error, but merely indicates that unnecessary and useless 
errors should be abandoned. Error should be taken as a part and parcel of human 
experience. In fact, Hegel describes error and erring as: 'fear of erring is already 
the error itself' (Hegel, 2018, p. 50). The roles of both children and educators 
are reserved; one should not be confiscated for the other. Therefore, we suggest 
using 'child-educator interaction' as an alternative to 'child-centeredness' in 
learning and education.
Understanding Historical Knowledge Vs. Constructivism
Another fundamental component of active learning is constructivism. Active 
learning follows two basic principles in terms of constructivism. Firstly, knowl­
edge is actively constructed by the learner. Secondly, the function of cognition is 
assimilation and accommodation that organizes the empirical world (Pardjono, 
2002). Constructivist theories examine how one creates epistemic systems for 
a meaningful understanding of the world. According to Raskin (2002), three 
important approaches can be identified: personal constructivism, radical con­
structivism, and social constructionism. Ruskin describes the personal construc­
tivism of George Kelly and the radical constructivism of Ernst von Glasersfeld 
under the model of epistemological constructivism. In epistemological construc­
tivism, it is held that although there is an external reality independent of the 
individual, this external reality can only be identified through the individual's 
mental constructs. Thus, knowledge is created only through mental constructs. 
On the other hand, there is hermeneutic constructivism, which denies the 
existence of any external reality independent of the individual. Knowledge is 
the result of the linguistic activity of a community of observers. The social 
constructionism of Kenneth J. Gergen and the radical constructivism of 
Humberto Maturana can be included in this view. Finally, Ruskin states that 
although there are different types of constructivism, all of them rely on the 
creation and human meaning-making process rather than discovery.
204            
HEGELIAN BILDUNG IN CHILDHOOD EDUCATION           

The components of constructivism are retrieved in active learning. 
Constructivism in active learning emphasizes that education should be based 
on learning rather than teaching. Learning is where children construct their 
knowledge personally and socially. Constructivism is an integral part of active 
learning, both conceptually and in practice; active learning as a concept means 
children construct their knowledge through physical and mental activities. It is 
defined as a practical process in which children actively engage with materials 
and objects and manipulate them (Morrison, 2004, p. 114). The child is at the 
center of active learning, and only the child's experience is first-hand and 
relevant (Kirpik, 2009, p. 71).
As mentioned earlier, in radical constructivism, the role of children/learners 
and their mental constructs is fundamental in the construction of knowledge, 
and children are continuously constructing and creating knowledge. Our object 
of criticism is this radical constructivism, not guided constructivism or realistic 
constructivism. We criticize this view because the border between knowledge 
and illusion cannot be recognized well by children in their process of creating 
knowledge. Children define knowledge on their own, and the validity of what 
a child imagines has no suitable criterion other than the child's own activity. 
Radical constructivism in education casts doubt on the validity of knowledge 
and blurs the border between illusion, imagination, and knowledge because 
children's experiences are only justified through mental construction regarding 
their language and discourse.
Constructivism is in fact an antithesis to the more traditional naïve realism. 
According to the naïve realism approach, the child's role is only to remember 
and ultimately discover the existing and real laws. It is no longer a question of 
creating knowledge; the child only has to learn the existing laws from the 
educator. Nevertheless, this realistic view is also inadequate in education 
because it ignores the vital role of children/learners in discovering and creating 
knowledge and solely defines them as passive acceptors.
Contrary to the two views of radical constructivism and naïve realism, 
Hegel's idea of Bildung defends a middle position that is the sum of creation 
and discovery. On the one hand, Hegel criticizes naïve realism in The 
Phenomenology of Spirit, in the section 'Sensuous-certainty' (Sinnliche 
Gewißheit), by asserting that human knowledge involves a priori conceptions 
of space and time (Westphal, 2003, p. 58). On the other hand, although for 
Hegel the experience of consciousness and trial and error are necessary for 
the understanding of knowledge (Hegel, 2018, p. 5o; Brandom, 2009; Tubbs, 
2005), it does not refer to constructivism and the construction of knowledge 
by the individual. Hence, one should base understanding on the conceptual 
experiences of others for entering the game of giving and asking for reasons. 
For Hegel, knowledge formation depends not only on the individual but also 
on the many historical-cultural patterns that consciousness has provided for 
the structure of knowledge (Stojanov, 2018). In Hegelian Bildung, knowledge 
has a historical nature that involves a historical reason: 'However, the other 
HEGELIAN BILDUNG IN CHILDHOOD EDUCATION            
205

aspect of spirit's coming-to-be, history, is that knowing self-mediating com­
ing-to-be- the spirit relinquished into time. However, this relinquishing is 
likewise the relinquishing of itself' (Hegel, 2018, p. 466). In Hegel's idealis­
tic philosophy, one needs to be aware of the conceptual history of knowledge 
in order to understand it. This knowledge goes moment by moment and has 
a history of its own and cannot be obtained instantly. Thus, this rational 
knowledge, which is historical, includes different views about the experiences 
of consciousness (Rockmore, 2009, pp. 472-475). Although these views and 
theories themselves are derived from previous experiences, they serve as 
models for us to understand reality. Rockmore (2009) believes that according 
to Hegel's viewpoint, we consistently formulate theories to understand the 
world as it exists in the experience. The creation of knowledge in Hegel's 
Bildung depends on historical and social patterns, whereas in the constructi­
vist approach, the individual is active at the moment. Hence, we introduce 
a creation-discovery alternative that can be evaluated intersubjectively.
Given the nature of education/Bildung in Hegel's The Phenomenology of 
Spirit, education in childhood cannot be organized in terms of constructivism. 
Although children's cognitive experiences and analyses are vital in under­
standing knowledge, they do not deny the value of presenting certain patterns 
and contents of knowledge to children. The child is not the only constructor 
of knowledge but needs another pole called the educator to get acquainted 
with the historical concepts of knowledge to understand reality. Therefore, in 
learning and education, we suggest 'understanding historical knowledge' as 
an alternative to 'constructivism' and its thesis, namely 'naïve realism'.
Addressing Concrete-Abstract Affairs Vs. Child's Manual Activity
Active learning begins with children's manual activities. This type of learning 
develops children's skills for life, not recalling information (Wolfe, 2006). 
Active learning curriculum is based on children's ongoing cognitive desires, 
needs, and interests and can be adapted to different age groups (Wood and 
Attfield, 2005, p. 130). Active learning is an immediate and direct experience 
with people, objects, ideas, and events and is taken to be a necessary condition 
for cognitive reconstruction and growth. It is held that children construct their 
own knowledge through activities that they start themselves (Hohmann and 
Weikart, 1995, p. 16). Active learning is often defined as a practical way of 
engaging children in educational activities (Allen et al., 2005, p. 261). 
Therefore, this method is comprised of practical activity and includes manual 
activities rather than theoretical activities.
Dall'Alba and Bengtsen (2019) criticize this component based on existential 
views and challenge the visibility trend and instrumentalism in active learning. 
Nevertheless, the overemphasis on the child's manual activity can also be 
criticized for being indifferent to children's mental abilities such as thought 
206            
HEGELIAN BILDUNG IN CHILDHOOD EDUCATION           

and language. In this context, Liszka (2013), relying on Pierce's rhetoric, 
presents a community of inquiry as an intellectual and logical model of active 
learning in the classroom. The claim that a child's knowledge is formed only 
through manual activity ignores children's other existential abilities that play 
a role in the development of knowledge.
At the opposite pole to active learning is the older model of memorization, 
which can be regarded as a thesis that has led to the antithesis of active learning. 
In memorization, the role of tangible and concrete objects is not taken into 
account in the development of knowledge. Only the child's mental and linguistic 
ability, in a shallow sense, is used to preserve what is called knowledge. This 
view is also rejected because it does not pay attention to the child's ideas and 
interests and looks at the child mechanically.
Education in Hegel's point of view pursuits a reconciliatory sublation 
between the concrete and the abstract. Hegel (Hegel, 2018) has dealt with this 
issue in his discussion of sensuous-certainty (Sinnliche Gewißheit) and perceiv­
ing (Wahrnehmung) in The Phenomenology of Spirit. He speaks about now and 
here as 'a mediated simplicity, or as being universality' in Sensuous-certainty 
(Hegel, 2018, p. 62). In Sensuous-certainty, Hegel criticizes immediate knowl­
edge, stating that human knowledge involves an understanding of space and 
time. Our perception is accompanied by an initial understanding of universality. 
Even in sensuous-certainty, one cannot attain the object immediately (Westphal, 
2003, p. 58; Mazurkievic, 2015, p. 79). So, the concrete/sensuous-certainty 
implies the abstract/universal. In addition, based on the child's cognitive ability 
and the aim of entering into the conceptual world, the child's ability is not 
limited to tangible and concrete affairs. Rather, we can speak of an abstract 
understanding appropriate to the child's cognitive ability at different stages. 
This abstract encounter with the concrete allows children to establish a more 
serious connection with issues and matters so that they can finally organize 
a better knowledge context in their minds. The child needs to think about the 
world in order to reach development and freedom (Tubbs, 2008). Although there 
is an opportunity for children to talk about their manual activities in active 
learning, there is not a profound integration between the activity and the talk. 
However, as mentioned earlier, in Hegelian education, every connection with 
the concrete implies a kind of abstraction; therefore, this superficial dialogue 
should be transcended through the child's experiences to introduce abstract 
processing from the very beginning. In other words, it is held that children's 
manual experiences determine not only the starting point of educational activ­
ities, but also the main path of learning. On the contrary, for Hegel, children's 
manual experiences are only considered as a tool for abstract and conceptual 
processing of objects. Therefore, we suggest 'addressing concrete-abstract 
affairs' as an alternative to 'child's manual activity'.
It is worth mentioning that in reality per ce there is no distinction between 
the concrete and the abstract, but this distinction needs to be recognized as 
a second-order activity as the result of reflection of the reality. For in child's 
HEGELIAN BILDUNG IN CHILDHOOD EDUCATION            
207

consciousness, the concrete and the abstract are intertwined and our phenom­
enological experiences are not meaningful without abstraction from the reality, 
as Hegel put it in sensuous-certainty and perceiving. This distinction is sig­
nificant from the point of view of the observer who conceptualizes it. Therefore, 
in the process of education, everything at any moment is an unanalyzed whole 
in terms of concrete/abstract. The importance of this distinction is only in being 
aware of the different levels that we take in conceptualizing the reality.
Communicative-Interactive Learning (CIL) Vs. Active Learning
As discussed earlier, active learning ignores the vital role of the educator in 
childhood by overemphasizing the child's activity in learning and education. On 
the contrary, one could talk about a type of learning in which the child's role is 
insignificant. The child is passive in this process, and the knowledge and 
information overflow to the child by the educator. If we want to suggest 
a thesis for the antithesis of active learning, we may choose the term 'passive 
learning'. This type of learning is also criticized because it is indifferent to the 
child's relationship and interaction with the environment and people.
As mentioned earlier, Hegelian Bildung includes conceptual, interactive, and 
historical elements. Contrary to active and passive learning approaches, educa­
tion based on Hegelian Bildung recognizes both poles of teaching and learning. 
Given that the role of an older teacher or educator is undeniable in the three 
proposed components, we can talk about an alternative to active learning called 
'Communicative-Interactive Learning (CIL).' CIL means that learning is 
achieved through communication with the environment and interaction with 
other people, and our understanding of learning is improved and developed 
through this interaction. Although the child is active in CIL, this activity is 
different from active learning. This difference could be seen in both the com­
municative and interactive aspects of CIL as an alternative. The communicative 
aspect of learning refers to the child's relationship with the environment and 
objects. It is a kind of communicative activity that is considered in active 
learning. However, as mentioned earlier, this relationship alone is not enough 
to understand knowledge and requires mutual interaction with others. The 
interactive aspect of learning attempts to improve the understanding of the 
child through child-educator interaction. It, therefore, responds to the child's 
cognitive egocentrism.
CONCLUSION
In this study, we attempted to critique active learning from a different perspec­
tive. For this purpose, based on Bildung in Hegel's The Phenomenology of 
Spirit, we deduced the conception of childhood education and then criticized 
and reconstructed the components of active learning. As explained, it seems that 
208            
HEGELIAN BILDUNG IN CHILDHOOD EDUCATION           

the conception of childhood education focusing on conceptual mediation recog­
nizes conceptual cognition in childhood. Thus, it provides the means for chil­
dren's conceptual development in interaction with adults. This interaction in 
education creates a new atmosphere for recognizing both the child's freedom 
and the educator's rational authority. In other words, this interaction introduces 
new educational opportunities by recognizing both the interests, beliefs, and 
historical-cultural experiences of the child and the educator's knowledge and 
experience. This allows the educator and the child to move freely towards their 
reasonable aims. The reasonable and universal aims arise from the normative 
and rational role of the teacher. As we explained above, this role of the teacher 
is not even touched by Kane (2004) in 'the mediating role of the teacher,' and 
Liszka (2013) in 'the community of inquiry model of active learning'. In active 
learning, the educator is considered only as a facilitator; therefore, this learning 
approach is not acceptable from the Hegelian point of view. We should speak of 
an atmosphere in education where both poles of learning and teaching are 
recognized. Therefore, we proposed 'Communicative-Interactive Learning' as 
an alternative to active learning.
Assuming the CIL, radical constructivism will no longer have a place in 
childhood education. CIL emphasizes upon the importance of objectivity and 
subjectivity in knowledge formation and rejects the radical forms of constructi­
vism that speak of the creation rather than the discovery-creation of knowledge. 
It warns us against solely focusing on children's mental constructs, which leads 
to an over-creation of knowledge by children; if we highlight only the mental 
constructs, we have trapped children in their fantasies and illusions. In fact, in 
CIL, we try to get closer to the truth by dispelling illusions.
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).
ENDNOTES
1 
Although it is Rousseau who first became aware of and realized the qualitative 
differences between adults and children, it is not deniable that it is due to the research 
of thinkers such as Piaget that human knowledge in this regard has significantly 
increased (Barrow and Woods, 2006, p. 117).
2 
Although active learning has been criticized and re-conceptualized by scholars such 
as Dall'Alba and Bengtsen (2019), Liszka (2013), and Kane (2004), it has not been 
examined from the viewpoint of Hegelian Bildung. Therefore, we aim to redefine 
Hegelian Bildung and education in childhood in order to review and reconstruct 
active learning.
3 
By The Phenomenology of Spirit, Hegel introduces himself as a philosopher distinct 
from all his contemporaries and he is recognized as a post-Kantian idealist philoso­
pher. The reason for the importance of this work is that Hegel continues to use the 
ideas he expresses in The Phenomenology of Spirit until the end of his life and 
defends them in his other works (Stern, 2002). Hegel worked as the headmaster of 
a gymnasium from 1808 to 1816. During this period, he wrote specifically on 
HEGELIAN BILDUNG IN CHILDHOOD EDUCATION            
209

education in his letter-reports to his friend Niethammer, who was the Commissioner 
of Education in Munich (Hegel, 1984). Hegel also wrote on Bildung in his 
Philosophy of Subjective Spirit in the Encyclopedia of Philosophical Sciences 
(Hegel, 1971) and Philosophy of Right (Hegel, 2001). These texts are not directly 
mentioned in this study because it seems that The Phenomenology of Spirit itself can 
provide a philosophical basis for other works on education by expressing Hegel's 
theory of the formation of knowledge.
4 
In addition to the general meaning discussed here, Bildung also has a particular 
meaning discussed in the chapter of the Spirit -spirit alienated from itself- in The 
Phenomenology of Spirit which is not directly considered in this research. Therefore, 
we organize the research according to the general meaning.
5 
Hegel's account of Bildung is different from other German thinkers. For instance, 
Herder considers Bildung to be one's organic growth, like a plant, which is internal 
and relies on the inner abilities of the individual and does not come from the outside. 
So, Bildung for Herder is self-Bildung. In contrast, for Humboldt, Bildung is 
a harmonic growth and development that is achieved by interaction with the outer 
world. In addition, an educated person is the one who has developed all his abilities 
in an equal way, and a person who has developed only one of his abilities promi­
nently is not considered educated (Danner, 1994).
6 
Although Fichte's three-step method including thesis, antithesis, and synthesis 
affected Hegel, he does not use these terms to describe his phenomenology; rather, 
he uses them only in his description and critique of Kant's philosophy because Kant 
has also used this triple (Inwood, 1992, p. 81).
ORCID
Saeed Azadmanesh 
http://orcid.org/0000-0003-0197-1856
Khosrow Bagheri Noaparast 
http://orcid.org/0000-0001-6032-9789
REFERENCES
Allen, T. (1946) Hegel: his philosophy and its educational implications. Peabody Journal 
of Education, 24(3), 151-158. 10.1080/01619564609536026
Allen, F., Taylor, A. and Turner, T. (2005) Active learning. In S. Capel, M. Leask and 
T. Turner (Eds) Learning to Teach in the Secondary School (New York, Routledge), 
258-275.
Association Montessori Internationale. (2018) Montessori curriculum. South African 
montessori association. Retrieved from: https://samontessori.org.za/public- 
documents/
Barrow, R. and Woods, R. (2006) An Introduction to Philosophy of Education (London 
and New York, Routledge).
Biesta, G. J. J. (2012) Giving teaching back to education: responding to the disappear­
ance of the teacher. Phenomenology & Practice, 6(2), 35-49. 10.29173/pandpr19860
Brandom, R. B. (2000) Articulating Reasons: An Introduction to Inferentialism 
(Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press).
Brandom, R. B. (2009) The structure of desire and recognition: self-consciousness and 
self-constitution. In A. Sørensen, M. Raffnsøe-Møller and A. Grøn (Eds) Dialectics, 
Self-consciousness, and Recognition: The Hegelian Legacy (Malmö, NSU Press), 
140-170.
210            
HEGELIAN BILDUNG IN CHILDHOOD EDUCATION           

Cattaneo, K. H. (2017) Telling active learning pedagogies apart: from theory to practice. 
Journal of New Approaches in Educational Research, 6(2), 144-152. 10.7821/ 
naer.2017.7.237
Dall'Alba, G. and Bengtsen, S. (2019) Re-imagining active learning: delving into 
darkness. Educational Philosophy and Theory, 51(14), 1477-1489. 10.1080/ 
00131857.2018.1561367
Danner, H. (1994) Bildung: a basic term of German education. Educational Sciences, 9, 1-29.
Dewey, J. (1997) Experience and Education (New York, Touchstone: Simon & Schuster).
Dewey, J. (2001) Democracy and Education (Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania State 
University).
Diković, M., & Gergorić. T. (2020) Teachers' assessment of active learning in teaching 
Nature and Society, Economic Research-Ekonomska Istraživanja, 33(1), 1265-1279.  
10.1080/1331677X.2020.1728563
Hegel, G. W. F. (1971) Philosophy of Mind: Being Part Three of the Encyclopaedia of 
Philosophical Sciences (W. Wallace, Trans.) (Oxford, Clarendon Press).
Hegel, G. W. F. (1984) Hegel: The Letters (C. Butler and C. Seiler, Trans.) (Bloomington, 
Indiana University press).
Hegel, G. W. F. (2001) Philosophy of Right (S. W. Dyde, Trans.) (Kitchener, Batoche 
Books) (Original work published 1821).
Hegel, G. W. F. (2018) Phenomenology of Spirit (T. Pinkard, Trans.) (Cambridge, 
Cambridge University Press) (Original work published 1807).
HighScope. (2021) The HighScope preschool curriculum (Preview kit) (Michigan, 
HighScope Press). Retrieved from: https://highscope.org/our-practice/curriculum 
(Accessed 19 09 2021).
Hohmann, M. and Weikart, D. P. (1995) In Educating young children: active learning 
practices for preschool and child care programs (Michigan, HighScope Press).
Hornstein, J. (2007) Bruner, Jerome. In R. S. New and M. Cochran (Eds) Early 
Childhood Education: An International Encyclopedia. (Westport: Praeger), 88-90.
Inwood, M. (1992) A Hegel Dictionary (Oxford: Blackwell Publishers).
Jessop, S. (2012) Education for citizenship and 'ethical life': an exploration of the 
hegelian concepts of bildung and sittlichkeit. Journal of Philosophy of Education, 
46(2), 287-302. 10.1111/j.1467-9752.2012.00849.x
Kane, L. (2004) Educators, learners and active learning methodologies. International 
Journal of Lifelong Education, 23(3), 275-286. 10.1080/0260/37042000229237
Kirpik, C. (2009) Active learning in history and social studies. In S. Aketin, P. Harnett, 
M. Ozturk and D. Smart (Eds) Teaching History and Social Studies for Multicultural 
Europe (Ankara, Harf Egitim Yayinciligi), 59-75.
Lilge, F. (1974) Philosophy and education in Hegel. British Journal of Educational 
Studies, 22(2), 147-165. 10.1080/00071005.1974.9973403
Liszka, J. (2013) Charles Peirce's rhetoric and the pedagogy of active learning. Educational 
Philosophy and Theory, 45(7), 781-788. 10.1111/j.1469-5812.2011.00763.x
Mazurkievic, S. (2015) Empirical, mathematical, and logical knowledge in Hegel. 
Balkan Journal of Philosophy, 7(1), 77-84. 10.5840/bjp20157110
Morrison, G. S. (2004) Early Childhood Education Today (9th ed.) (New Jersey, Upper 
Saddle River: Pearson).
Nelson, J. K. (2007) Progressive education. In R. S. New and M. Cochran (Eds) Early 
Childhood Education: An International Encyclopedia(Westport: Praeger), 667-669.
Odenstedt, A. (2008) Hegel and gadamer on bildung. The Southern Journal of 
Philosophy, 46(4), 559-580. 10.1111/j.2041-6962.2008.tb00085.x
Pardjono. (2002) Active learning: the Dewey, Piaget, Vygotsky, and constructivist theory 
perspectives. Journal ILMU Pendidkan, 9(3), 163-178. 10.17977/jip.v9i3.487
HEGELIAN BILDUNG IN CHILDHOOD EDUCATION            
211

Pierlejewski, M. (2020) Education, Child-Centered. In D. T. Cook (Ed.), The SAGE 
Encyclopedia of Children and Childhood Studies (California: SAGE Publications, 
Ltd), 698-700. 10.4135/9781529714388
Raskin, J. D. (2002) Constructivism in psychology: personal construct psychology, radical 
constructivism, and social constructionism. In J. D. Raskin and S. K. Bridges (Eds) 
Studies in Meaning: Exploring Constructivist Psychology (New York, Pace University 
Press) 1-25.
Rockmore, T. (2009) Hegel. In A. Tucker (Ed.), A Companion to the Philosophy of 
History and Historiography (Hoboken, New Jersey: Blackwell Publishing Ltd), 
468-476.
Rousseau, J. J. (1979) Emile or on Education (A. Bloom, Trans.) (New York: Basic 
Books) (Original work published 1762).
Somr, M. (2013) G.W.F. Hegel: education as a moment of historical reality. Studia 
Edukacyjne, 24, 289-301. http://hdl.handle.net/10593/6854 (Retrived 20 08 2021).
Sørensen, A. (2015) Bildung in Hegel's phenomenology: acute alienation and education. 
Red Española de Filosofía, 9, 63-80.
Stern, R. (2002) Hegel and the Phenomenology of Spirit (London and New York, 
Routledge).
Stojanov, K. (2018) Education, Self-consciousness, and Social Action: Bildung as a Neo- 
Hegelian Concept. (London and New York, Routledge).
Tubbs, N. (1996) Hegel's educational theory and practice. British Journal of Educational 
Studies, 44(2), 181-199. 10.2307/3121731
Tubbs, N. (2005) Hegel. Journal of Philosophy of Education, 39(2), 329-355. 10.1111/ 
j.0309-8249.2005.00441.x
Tubbs, N. (2008) Education in Hegel (London & New York: Continuum).
Tubbs, N. (2014) Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich. In D. C. Phillips (Ed.), Encyclopedia 
of Educational Theory and Philosophy (California: SAGE Reference), 364-467.  
10.4135/9781483346229
Tubbs, N. (2017) Hegel and philosophy of education (II). In M. A. Peters (Ed.), 
Encyclopedia of Educational Philosophy and Theory (Singapore: Springer Nature), 
976-980. 10.1007/978-981-287-532-7
Westphal, K. R. (2003) Hegel's Epistemology: A Philosophical Introduction to the 
Phenomenology of Spirit (Cambridge: Hackett).
Wolfe, K. (2006) Active learning. Journal of Teaching in Travel & Tourism, 6(1), 77-82.  
10.1300/J172v06n01_05
Wood, A. W. (1998) Hegel on education. In A. O. Rorty (Ed.), Philosophers on 
Education: Historical Perspectives (London and New York, Routledge), 300-317.
Wood, E. and Attfield, J. (2005) Play, Learning and the Early Childhood Curriculum 
(2nd Ed.) (London, Paul Chapman Publishing Ltd).
Correspondence: 
Khosrow Bagheri Noaparast, 
Philosophy of Education, 
University of Tehran, 
Tehran, Iran 
Email: khbagheri@ut.ac.ir
212            
HEGELIAN BILDUNG IN CHILDHOOD EDUCATION           

