Australasian Philosophical Review
ISSN: 2474-0500 (Print) 2474-0519 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rapr20
Rethinking Again
Shaun Gallagher
To cite this article: Shaun Gallagher (2018) Rethinking Again, Australasian Philosophical
Review, 2:2, 234-245, DOI: 10.1080/24740500.2018.1552104
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/24740500.2018.1552104
Published online: 05 May 2019.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 232
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rapr20

REPLY
Rethinking Again
Shaun Gallagher
University of Memphis; University of Wollongong
In memory of Lynne Rudder Baker
First, let me thank all of the authors who responded to my essay on 'Rethinking
Nature' [Gallagher 2019]. I've noted Lynne Rudder Baker's passing in the dedica-
tion. I should mention that in September 2017 I was on a panel with her at the
Deutsche Gesellschaft f€ur Philosophie in Berlin where she mentioned that she had
authored a response to my paper. I was able to thank her in person at that time. It
seems appropriate to begin my reply with a point that she made, both in her paper
and at that conference.
1. Why We Shouldn't Leave Science to the Scientists
Lynne Rudder Baker and I agree on principles but disagree on tactics. In
responding to my question about whether the practice of science needs to change
if one adopts a non-reductionist approach, Baker [2019: 171-8]. suggests that we
'leave the definition of science to the scientists, [who] seem to be happy with
reductionism'; rather, she 'would begin with the classic conception of nature and
show what in nature cannot be explained by science so conceived.' Accordingly,
she rejects scientific naturalism if that includes the idea that science can explain
everything. One thing it cannot explain, on her view, is the robust first-person
perspective.
Baker distinguishes between a rudimentary first-person perspective and a robust
one, and provides the example, 'I wish that I were about to eat lunch', where the
first use of the first-person pronoun is what she calls a transparent 'I' correspond-
ing to the rudimentary first-person perspective, and the second one corresponds to
the robust first-person perspective, which, following Casta~neda [1966], is an opa-
que, quasi-indexical 'I'. As she explains, 'I', as a quasi-indexical, cannot be substi-
tuted by third-person terms (unlike the rudimentary use of the first-person
pronoun, where 'I' could be rephrased, 'SG' or 'the worst player on the team' and
still preserve reference). Accordingly, it 'is outside the purview of the classic con-
ception of science', since classic science is 'wholly objective' whereas the robust
first-person perspective is not wholly objective, despite being 'a dispositional prop-
erty that is part of nature' [Baker 2019: 173].
Baker [ibid.] associates the robust first-person perspective with the 'disposition
to conceive of oneself as oneself in the first person' (emphasis added). On some
CONTACT Shaun Gallagher
s.gallagher@memphis.edu
 2019 Australasian Association of Philosophy
AUSTRALASIAN PHILOSOPHICAL REVIEW
2018, VOL. 2, NO. 2, 234-245
https://doi.org/10.1080/24740500.2018.1552104

views, this perspective would be a reflective, conceptual one where I am able to
regard myself as others might regard me and thereby, in some sense, take myself as
an object, or perhaps as the narrated self at the start of a narrative that explains
why I am not able to eat lunch right now. Whether this is the right way to under-
stand the robust first-person perspective or not, Baker is right that scientists may
very well be happy with reductionism, since some of them often try to explain this
perspective in reductionist terms, pointing to particular neuronal activations in, for
example, various areas of the cortical midline structure (e.g., Northoff and
Bermpohl [2004]; see Vogeley and Gallagher [2011] for review). Baker dismisses
both reductionist and eliminativist approaches, however.
Like Baker, David Macarthur [2019: 182] doubts that science can explain every-
thing, and specifically he wants to leave subjects and subjectivity 'outside of the
purview of scientific intelligibility'. Would Baker and Macarthur want to rule out
the idea that we could learn more about the robust first-person perspective by
studying pathological disorders, such as depersonalization, where such things may
go awry? Would they rule out attempts to explain how speakers come to gain this
perspective developmentally, or how this perspective supports communicative prac-
tices, the formation of narratives, memory, imagination, as well as 'the list of
actions and attitudes' that, as Baker indicates, depend on it [ibid.: 58]? In such
regards there surely is some scientific intelligibility.
Baker wants to leave science to the scientists. Of course, there is a common
view that science and philosophy are two different projects and perhaps only exter-
nally related. But this is to ignore the history of science and the intimate relation
that philosophy and science have always had. Furthermore, nothing in what I sug-
gest in 'Rethinking Nature' [Gallagher 2019] implies that we need to give up the
objectivity of science. This is also a worry raised by Macarthur and by Vazquez
and Wheeler [2019]. In fact, there are a couple of different characterizations of
objectivity in my paper—Fjelland's description of objectivity as mind-independent,
which he associates with the classic conception of reality, but also Husserl's notion
that objectivity is constituted intersubjectively. To be clear, I think of objectivity as
a methodological or epistemological virtue, in contrast to objectivism—the idea
that we treat everything, including subjects or relations, as mere objects, or that we
ignore the relational character of the specific phenomena that we want to study.1 I
do not take the objectivity of science to be equivalent to 'a description of a reality
that exists independently of any human observer or human subjectivity' [ibid.: 147],
or
to
depend
on
adopting
the
classical
scientific
conception
of
nature.
Phenomenology itself, classically, has tried to be an objective study of subjectivity—
a study that brackets the phenomenologist's biases and pre-judgments, and that
tries to steer clear of preconceptions and pre-established theories. To object to nat-
uralism by saying that science is 'wholly objective, and nature is not' [Baker 2019:
1There is another point to be made here about Carl Sachs's [2019: 231] objection to the ambiguity
involved in my claim that affordances 'are relational; they are not objective things located in the
environment.' I meant that they are not mere objects or things independent of the agent, or independent
of a way of life (see Rietveld and Kiverstein [2013]), precisely because they are relational. Sachs is right that
my statement is too ambiguous. In addition, however, pace Sachs [2019: 231], I did not suggest that
affordances need be introspectively available, but I would say that affordances are relative to an agent who
is also a subject in the sense that she is aware of some aspects of what she is doing.
AUSTRALASIAN PHILOSOPHICAL REVIEW
235

175] is to confuse this concept. Science should aspire to objectivity; but that doesn't
necessarily turn nature into something purely objective.
Something similar can be said in response to the claim that to understand nature
as relational is to introduce a form of anthropocentric idealism, a worry also
expressed by Macarthur and by Murray Smith [2019]. The idea, which is not a new
thought, is not to deny the Big Bang or that the universe pre-existed our human
first-person perspective, but rather to say that our third-person scientific perspective
on the Big Bang or the universe is always constrained by the first-person and
second-person perspectives that enable there to be science, a scientific community,
and a set of scientific practices. We know the world as we know it, and science does
not give us a way around that, it gives us a certain type of knowledge.
Baker [2019: 176] suggests that 'methodology serves; it doesn't govern'—I think it
both serves and governs what we can know. A particular method in every case gov-
erns because in every case it is limited, and it poses only questions that it can
answer. We can build a brain-imaging fMRI machine to see what goes on inside the
brain. What we get are complex BOLD signals about blood flow that require us to
use other tools, like statistical methods, to smooth out and average the data, which
puts us at least twice removed from the picture we are trying to capture, and places
limits on the questions that this methodology can answer. Phenomenology is not an
exception to this rule of method; it provides another limited tool that can answer
only a limited set of questions. In some cases you can put together two tools that
mutually constrain each other, but that at the same time expand the kinds of ques-
tions that can be asked. In some cases, to answer different questions, one needs
ethnographic methods or chemical or biological assays rather than fMRI machines or
phenomenology. If the subject matter is cognition and what we need to study is a
complex gestalt of brain-body-environment, then we need more than fMRI techni-
ques and more than phenomenology. In no respect was my aim to give precedence
to phenomenology (as a technical method), or to suggest that phenomenologists
should define what counts as science. On this point Baker and I agree.
Let me also note that the inherent limitation of any method is a broader her-
meneutical point (see Gadamer [2004]), and that the idea of rethinking nature does
not imply that somehow scientific methods will suddenly lose their limitations.
Such limitations also imply that explanations will always remain incomplete and
imperfect. This is one point of agreement that I have with Macarthur's [2019] lib-
eral naturalism, and that means I am not as committed 'to the completeness of the
scientific image' as Macarthur thinks I am.
In contrast to both Baker and Macarthur, Vazquez and Wheeler [2019: 149]
highlight the continuity of science and philosophy; but they move in the opposite
direction, suggesting that if there is a conflict between philosophy and science,
then science rules: 'it's science, and not philosophy, that calls the shots.' This, at
least, is one of the two strategies that they propose. Their motivation for this strat-
egy, which they call 'minimal naturalism', seems to be the same as that expressed
by Sachs [2019: 229-33] who suspects that I am trying to put phenomenology in
charge, so that if a particular scientific explanation is incompatable with phenom-
enology we should reject it.2 In contrast to 'minimal naturalism' I have defended a
2Sachs [2019] also raises some issues concerning levels of explanation and compositionalism which I will
not try to address here, but see Gallagher [2018] on these topics.
236
S. GALLAGHER

view that I've called 'mutual enlightenment' between phenomenology, or philoso-
phy more generally, and science [Gallagher 1997]. This is close to, but perhaps a
slightly weaker form of the idea of 'mutual constraints' championed by the neuro-
biologist Francisco Varela [1996]. On this approach the negotiation is two-way
(what Sachs [2019: 233] calls 'productive dialogue') so that if confronted with a
philosophical question the scientist needs to think about it as much as the philoso-
pher needs to rethink when confronted with convincing scientific data. To be clear
and precise, however, this is not usually about 'empirical data that enjoy collective
support from a community of scientific experts and which indicate that the existing
science is in perfectly good shape' [Vazquez and Wheeler 2019: 151]. One should
distinguish between issues that pertain to methodology versus data versus interpret-
ation. Methodological issues, including issues that relate to experimental design,
may lead to questions about data, but for the most part, if the data are in good
shape, the real negotiation is about the interpretation of those data. In this regard I
think philosophy can play an important role. When confronted with the caution
raised by Evelyn Fox Keller in the example that Vazquez and Wheeler [ibid.] men-
tion, it seems to me that scientists do have an obligation to rethink, not their data,
but their interpretation. Good data alone do not mean that science is in perfectly
good shape.
Vazquez and Wheeler make a second proposal: to 'leave nature out of it'—that
is, one can proceed without raising big philosophical questions about the nature of
nature. I agree entirely. Indeed, one can proceed in the practice of an enactive-phe-
nomenologically-informed
science,
without
rethinking
nature.
Vazquez
and
Wheeler list a number of examples of how, in practice, one can integrate phenom-
enology, enactivism, and cognitive science. Indeed, in thinking about the natural-
ization of phenomenology, Varela's [1996] concept of neurophenomenology and
my own proposal for front-loaded phenomenology [Gallagher 2003; Gallagher and
Brøsted Sørensen 2006] are two possible models that do not necessarily raise the
larger philosophical questions about nature.3 Accordingly, I don't accept the terms
of what Vazquez and Wheeler pose as a dilemma. I cut the cards differently. I
think that I can say both that enactive-phenomenological insights can inform scien-
tific practice without raising the question about nature, and that an enactivist phil-
osophy of nature can raise questions about nature that may or may not have
implications for scientific practice.
I realize in putting it this way—raising the question of practice as a separate
question—I get in trouble with Guilherme Sanches de Oliveira [2019] who, fol-
lowing a good pragmatist tradition wants to insist on the inseparability of theory
and practice. I'm inclined to agree that theory and practice are inseparable, at least
in theory. But it depends on what one means by theory. If, as is usually the case,
the researcher is testing a particular hypothesis (which belongs to a particular the-
ory), or if one is interpreting data from a particular theoretical perspective, then
clearly it is difficult to separate scientific practice from one's theory. It is less likely,
however, that an overarching philosophy of nature directly informs one's practice.
3For a neurophenomenological study that incorporates the type of triangulation of methods—first-person,
third-person (neurophysiological), and cultural—that Brancazio [2019] finds in Einstein [2012], see Gallagher
et al. [2015]. For a good example of how front-loaded phenomenology works, see McGivern's [2018]
discussion of the senses of agency and ownership.
AUSTRALASIAN PHILOSOPHICAL REVIEW
237

I have some anecdotal evidence for this from a group of eight experimental psy-
chologists working at what is now called the MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences
Unit at Cambridge. In 1994, I presented this group with three philosophical-her-
meneutical theories about what scientific research is supposed to look like, and I
asked them to describe which theory best fit their own practice. They rejected the
traditional conception which suggested that in their practice they were concerned
with big questions or about making progress towards understanding the Truth
(with a capital 'T') about the nature of reality. Every one of them described their
practice as simply being oriented towards determining what the next experiment
would be (given the very particular question they were investigating) in a manner
that seemed more like playing a game. In this respect Sanches de Oliviera's [ibid.:
201] description, citing Rorty, captures it perfectly: 'science is not the empirical
search for objective truth, and a "mirroring" of nature, but instead a way in which
humans work together to solve problems: it is a form of embodied, spatiotempor-
ally-extended, socially-distributed, and culturally-embedded know-how'. It's a prac-
tice directly informed by a particular theoretical question, but not a practice that
worries about how one conceives of nature.
As a final point let me also deny what Vazquez and Wheeler [2019] present as
a second dilemma associated with Pollard's detranscendentalization worry: either
we acknowledge that phenomenology and science can work together, in which case
phenomenology becomes detransendentalized; or we hold fast to a transcendental
phenomenology and give up on any continuity between philosophy and science. I
think this is a false dichotomy and that we can again cut the cards differently.
Phenomenology is a big tent—it includes different versions of transcendental phe-
nomenology, which is very much a different project, or as Sanches de Oliviera
[2019: 203] puts it, a 'distinct endeavour' from natural science; but it also includes
phenomenological psychology. On this point I often cite Husserl [1970: §57]: 'every
analysis or theory of transcendental phenomenology—including ... the theory of
the transcendental constitution of an objective world—can be developed in the nat-
ural realm, by giving up the transcendental attitude'. Detranscendentalizing phe-
nomenology (if that is even the right way to put it) does not mean destroying or
denying transcendental phenomenology; it means adopting a different attitude that
enables us to do phenomenological psychology, or neurophenomenology, or to see
the relevance of phenomenology for cognitive science.
2. Integration and Disintegration
If Patrick McGivern [2019] makes the analogy between phenomenology and
quantum mechanics stronger than I intended, his analysis is nonetheless product-
ive and insightful. I would resist, however, equating quantum entanglement and
the relationality involved in affordances, although this analogy leads McGivern to
an interesting suggestion, namely that one affordance may be entangled with
another. Although I did not claim 'that relationality in phenomenology derives
from the relationality of quantum mechanics' [ibid.: 163], it may be productive to
think of examples of affordances that are entangled in some loose sense.
McGivern cautions us that this could undermine our ability to draw distinctions
between different affordances. But I don't see why that would be the case.
Consider a description that might be found in a discussion of moral conflict.
238
S. GALLAGHER

A situation may afford action possibilities A and B, where the affordance A may
involve affordance B, not simply in a means-end fashion, but in such a way that
A involves a morally good practice and unavoidably and at the same time B, a
morally bad practice (e.g., feeding your children requires you to steal from some-
one else in need). Although this may present a moral perplexity it does not pre-
sent a problem for distinguishing A and B.
More important is McGivern's [2019] emphasis on multi-scale explanations. As
McGivern suggests, classical physics may be better than quantum mechanics at
explaining things that we find in our life-world just because we don't experience
things at the quantum scale. That science has to take into account different scales
that are sometimes incommensurable, or entail complementarity in explanation,
however, leads us away from reductionism, as McGivern points out. In the area of
cognitive science, Varela's [1996] distinction among different timescales helps to
show that experiential (phenomenological) processes that are manifest at the
'integrative' (1-5 second) timescale are not temporally commensurable with neur-
onal processes that take place on the 'elementary' timescale (10-100 milliseconds),
although these processes are dynamically related across these timescales. Here is
one of many examples. When on the elementary timescale a stimulus of 50 milli-
seconds is followed by a stimulus of 100 milliseconds the integrated event (i.e., the
combined event experienced on the integrative level) is not necessarily an additive
sum of 150 msecs.
Instead, the earlier stimulus interacts with the processing of the 100 msec. interval,
resulting in the encoding of a distinct temporal object. Thus, temporal information is
encoded in the context of the entire pattern, not as conjunctions of the component
intervals [Karmarkar and Buonomano 2007: 432].
This kind of integration occurs according to dynamical, non-linear principles.
Russell Meyer [2019] points to examples of this kind of extra-componential
dynamics in the realm of social cognition. He and I agree that some rethinking
about the causality-constitution relation is required in mechanist accounts. In
the realm of cognitive science, dynamical systems theory, as Varela's neurophe-
nomenology suggests, may be a way to integrate, in a non-reductive manner, the
different and non-linear relations that operate across neurobiological and phe-
nomenological timescales, implying a concept of dynamical constitution that
involves reciprocal causality [Gallagher 2018; Kirchhoff 2017; see Meyer 2018].
McGivern [2019], however, sees some tension in any claims to explanatory com-
plementarity (as in Bohr's quantum theory, or perhaps between mechanisms and
dynamical systems) and the kind of explanatory integration that I am suggesting.
This applies as well to the kind of triangulation that Smith [2019] recommends,
since each science starts with its own assumptions, not only about what questions
to ask, but about what will count as good answers.
Instead of integration ... complementarity gives us very strict divisions between the
domains of different sciences. Put very broadly, where one science speaks, the others fall
silent. Drawing the analogy out with phenomenology and cognitive science, we should
expect certain experimental arrangements to be best treated phenomenologically and others
to be best treated in accordance with the more traditional cognitive sciences. This isn't
really a picture where different theories mutually support, inform, and transform one
another: it's more like a hot-desking arrangement where one theory always arranges to be
absent while the other is at work. [McGivern 2019: 166-7].
AUSTRALASIAN PHILOSOPHICAL REVIEW
239

Nonetheless, McGivern gives us a nice example of how neurocognitive and phe-
nomenological accounts of agency and ownership can be productively integrated,
and Nicolle Brancazio [2019: 220] offers examples of how 'data gained through
multiple methods helps in better understanding the data from each.' More gener-
ally, multi-scale models in science provide good examples. Referencing the need to
use different theoretical frameworks, and a number of simplifying (and indeed,
false) assumptions to explain how a plucked violin string makes its sound,
McGivern [2019] suggests that since this is an explanation given to us by classical
physics, then even the classic conception of nature will allow for a non-reductionist
integration of different theoretical frameworks. 'Thus, reconceiving naturalism
might be more a matter of articulating a concept of nature that is already part of
classical physics, rather than replacing this concept with sometime entirely new'
[ibid.: 169]. This is also a point made by Barrett, Garcıa-Valdecasas and Sanchez-
Ca~nizares [2019] when they highlight the idea that the field concept in physics
already indicates a relational conception of nature, but that the limitations of that
concept still leaves normativity or the concept of value problematic.
These insights let us see an important point, namely, that the idea of rethinking
nature is not something that arises out of thin air. At times, normal science or clas-
sical physics bumps up against limitations (as in quantum theory and in plucked
violin string theory) in ways that are more a matter of disintegration or extension,
and in such cases it starts to point towards a different conception of nature. In
effect, science is pushed a bit in that direction by limitations in the clas-
sical conception.
I take it that this is also part of what Joe Dewhurst [2019] is suggesting, specif-
ically in regard to how we should re-conceive of brain function in terms of con-
text-sensitivity. He points to a number of studies that push in this direction.4 My
argument is not that tomorrow morning we should start thinking of nature differ-
ently, and start doing science differently. Science is constantly in self-correcting
mode, and eventually, when it passes a certain threshold, it will push us to think of
nature differently. Rethinking how the brain works is one part of this (see
Gallagher et al. [2013]). As Andrew Sims [2019] also argues, even if we don't get a
meta-Copernican revolution, we can be led to rethink the classical view by integrat-
ing concepts of affordance and agency. In this way we end up on a very different
path, without seriously overhauling scientific practice. Whether this leads to radic-
ally expanding 'the concept of agency to include "inanimate agents",' [ibid.: 197],
as one might find in Bruno Latour's [2005] 'actor-network theory', remains an
open question.
3. On the Blanket
Sims also suggests that internalist versions of predictive processing, which frame
affordances in terms of representations, and agency in terms of active inference, do
not meet the challenge. In contrast, along this internalist line Jakob Hohwy [2019]
defends two kinds of scientific reductionism—I'll call them wide reductionism and
4Rethinking the way the brain works, without employing the concept of representation, as Smith [2019]
indicates, is not so easy. But Brancazio's [2019] highlighting of Gillian Einstein's [2012] situated
neuroscience would fit with this idea (to which I would add Chemero [2009]).
240
S. GALLAGHER

narrow reductionism. Wide reductionism refers to explanations that consider not
just one relatum in a relation, but all relata—not just brain processes, for example,
but the causal processes that involve body and environment as well. This seems in
some way just the kind of explanation that I am seeking and calling a non-reduc-
tionist approach, especially if we take environment to include social and cultural
factors. Yet Hohwy argues that we can still frame this kind of explanation as a neu-
roscientific one as long as we don't pare down the notion of neuroscience. I take
neuroscience to mean the study of the brain or central nervous system, and I grant
that an explanation of what is going on in the brain is extremely important part of
an explanation of behaviour and experience. It's not always clear, however, which
way the explanation needs to go.
Consider an example. Sven decides to buy a new car. It's a small sleek sports
car. It has a driver's seat in which he can sit only uncomfortably because of his
long legs. Despite this feeling of discomfort and a kind of background anxiety
about driving for any amount of time in this car because of it, Sven decides to buy
it because it's just the kind of car that will impress his friends and especially his
romantic partner. Hohwy is optimistic that computational neuroscience will be able
to explain Sven's behaviour because it can take into account the sensory input that
correlates in some sense to Sven's bodily discomfort (proprioceptive and nociocep-
tive signals from his long legs) mixed with the pleasure he feels when he sees his
partner's approving look. As Hohwy [ibid.: 140] notes:
neuroscience should allow itself the idea that the brain's sensory input is caused by various
states of the body and the world. For example, it is standard fare in neuroscience to
describe co-variation of external stimuli and brain activity (for example, faces and activity
in the fusiform face area ... ).
When Sven sees a smile on his partner's face as he drives up in his new car,
we can certainly expect a successful minimization of prediction errors in his
brain, since it is clearly more likely (given Sven's prior knowledge about his part-
ner and the likelihood that his partner is not smiling because he or she is amused
by Sven's choice of car) that the smile is a sign of approval. That depends some-
what on his partner's preferences and expectations, and perhaps on how much a
sleek sports car counts in terms of social status, and perhaps on the partner's
concern or lack of concern about their shared bank account. It does seem pos-
sible that computational neuroscience could provide a model that explains what
is happening in Sven's brain, even if what is happening must be quite compli-
cated. But does that computational model give us an explanation of why such
things are happening? Sven's behaviour and his pleasure are now meshed with
his partner's, and their interactions are embedded within certain social situations,
cultural contexts, and normative practices. Clearly some of these factors may be
better explained by some mix of evolutionary theory, reproductive biology, eco-
nomics (which is more than neuroeconomics), and sociology (which is more than
social neuroscience). Sven, and his partner, and their friends are not just brains;
if they are parts of nature, they are also parts and products of a second nature
which can be explained (as economics and the social sciences can explain) in
causal terms that simply go beyond what computational neuroscience can explain
AUSTRALASIAN PHILOSOPHICAL REVIEW
241

if computational neuroscience provides an explanation of what happens in
the brain.5
Hohwy thinks that I am paring down neuroscience. I don't think that I am par-
ing it down any more than he is when he says that neuroscience should be allowed
to explain the complex causal dynamics of serotonin re-uptake, and astronomy
should be allowed to tell a causal dynamical story about how the tides result from
oscillatory gravitational processes over vast timescales between the moon and water
on Earth [ibid.: 140].
Neuroscience is not astronomy, nor is it psychology, sociology, economics,
anthropology, literature or art. As Brancazio [2019] makes clear, subjects in neuro-
science experiments are embedded in ethical and political contexts that can't be
comprehended in reductionist explanations to neural mechanisms. Accordingly, we
need at the very least to situate or contextualize neuroscience in an integrated,
interdisciplinary approach.
Hohwy's [2019: 140-1] optimism about neuroscience ('classical computational-
neural scientific causal-statistical accounts already are able to capture relational
states of the world. This suggests that reduction is in fact possible ... '), however,
leads him to the second narrow form of reductionism. This narrow reductionism
admits that neuroscience explains just what happens in the brain but claims that
that's all that needs to be explained. This is Hohwy's favoured approach—a strictly
internalist predictive processing (PP) [Hohwy 2013]. In PP the notion of the sys-
tem's priors folds a lot of variegated factors, including the agent's action possibil-
ities, into the generative model that drives prediction error minimization. This
accounts for the role of skills, habit, learning, memory, and affect in affordance-
based perception [Gallagher 2017]. As Hohwy [2019: 141] suggests, this just is
'perceiver-including'.
On this narrow approach, the Markov blanket6 is wrapped tightly around the
brain, prediction error minimization (PEM) is primary, and active inference (mov-
ing and acting in the world) is in service to the central processes that do the real
work. The perceiver is not fully embodied and is not extensively in the world.
PEM should make us resist conceptions of [a mind-world] relation on which
the mind is in some fundamental way open or porous to the world, or on which it
is in some strong sense embodied, extended or enactive. Instead, PEM reveals the
mind to be inferentially secluded from the world, it seems to be more neurocentri-
cally skull-bound than embodied or extended, and action itself is more an inferen-
tial process on sensory input than an enactive coupling with the environment
[Hohwy 2016: 259].
5Let me note I'm emphasizing here that there still would be some distance to go (beyond neuroscience) on
the causal explanation. In addition, I acknowledge that we could go even further and introduce questions
about the space of reasons (Sellars) and questions about normativity that Barrett, Garcıa-Valdecasas and
Sanchez-Ca~nizares [2019] and Macarthur [2019] emphasizes. But as Macarthur [2004] himself argues, there
is nothing about these questions that require a supernatural or 'rampant' Platonic answer. Accordingly, I
think that evolutionary, anthropological, developmental, psychopathological, as well as cross-cultural studies
could tell us something further about the nature of normativity.
6The mathematical/statistical concept of a Markov blanket is derived from formal treatments of Bayesian
networks, Markov decision theory and causal dependency [Friston 2013]. An organism in relation to its
environment, for example, is defined in terms of a Markov blanket, i.e., a collection of states that define the
boundary between organism and environment (see Gallagher and Allen [2016]).
242
S. GALLAGHER

The states associated with sensory input and efferent output of the brain form
the relevant cognitive boundary, the Markov blanket, according to Hohwy. In prin-
ciple all we need in order to understand the behaviour of the system is to observe
its input-output states and priors. 'Causes beyond this blanket, such as bodily states
or external states are rendered uninformative once the states of the blanket are
known' [Hohwy 2016: 283n14]. If we think that perceivers and agents are in some
important way embodied and situated, they fall outside of Hohwy's Markov blan-
ket. It's difficult to see how the relationality of affordance (an organism-environ-
ment relation) fits into an explanatory model where perceivers or agents are locked
up in solitary confinement in neural self-models or representations and are not in
direct contact with the world around them. This is the point made by In^es
Hipolito [2019]. She does not rule out the relevance of PP as part of a possible
explanation since the organism includes the brain. Hohwy notes, however, there
are ongoing debates about where to locate the Markov blanket. Clark [2017: 17],
for example, challenges Hohwy's placement, and 'invites us to contemplate agents
whose sensory boundaries are not fixed and whose cognitive architectures may
extend, in temporally varying ways, beyond the biological brain'. This includes the
idea of nested blankets—brain within body within environment, and it pushes us
closer to a non-reductionist, enactivist conception of affordances [Bruineberg et al.
2016; Hipolito 2019]. Moreover, there are disagreements about whether one should
conceive of Markov blankets as boundaries that cut a system off rather than more
permeable interfaces. Notions of circular causality in the conception of the Markov
blanket [Friston 2013], for example, are consistent with the concept of reciprocal
causation in enactivist accounts of dynamical coupling.
In this regard I welcome Ross Pain's [2019] important proposal that we think
more in terms of processes than in terms of entities, or what Sims [2019] calls
'individuals.' This would also be consistent with Barrett, Garcıa-Valdecasas and
Sanchez-Ca~nizares's [2019] suggestion that we revisit thinkers such as Bergson,
Peirce, James and Whitehead. Whereas Sims nicely suggests an alternative account
in terms of affordances,7 Pain [2019: 207] suggests that the processual view makes
PP more relevant. His question is: 'How should we characterise the processes asso-
ciated with subjectivity?' To take this one step further than Pain, the way to answer
this question without buying into the neurocentric internalist version of PP that
Hohwy proposes is in terms that come closer to an enactivist view of the free-
energy principle [Friston 2010], that is, a view that understands that principle
within the biological framework of autopoiesis or self-organizing systems [Bitbol
and Gallagher 2018; Gallagher and Allen 2018; Kirchhoff 2018; Ramstead, Badcock
and Friston 2018].
In conclusion let me say that I've learned a lot from these replies to 'Rethinking
Nature' [Gallagher 2019]. Perhaps the most important idea is what appears to be a
consensus response to the final question I raised about scientific practice but to
7I think a lot can be said in favor of this account. It moves us away from a focus on laws of nature, where,
as Sims [2019: 195] indicates, 'singular causal happenings are to be reduced to instances of the laws of
nature applied to particular conditions.' On the classical view, laws of nature neatly apply in areas such as
physics and chemistry, but as a number of philosophers working on mechanisms have suggested, 'they
rarely figure in the explanations produced by biologists, neuroscientists and cognitive scientists' [Meyer
2018]. In dynamical approaches to explanation the focus is on relational invariance rather than general laws
[Meyer 2019]. Importantly, invariance 'admits of degrees' [Woodward 1997: 34].
AUSTRALASIAN PHILOSOPHICAL REVIEW
243

which I did not venture a definitive answer. The consensus seems to be that we do
not have to abandon our current scientific practices since there are some product-
ive variations within those practices that can push us towards a reconceptualization
of nature. On whether this will indeed lead to such a reconceptualization, however,
the jury is still out.
References
Baker, L. R. 2019. The Hand of Nature in the Glove of Phenomenology: Reply to Gallagher,
Australasian Philosophical Review 2/2: 171-78.
Barrett, N. F., M. Garcıa-Valdecasas and J. Sanchez-Ca~nizares 2019. 'I Can' vs. 'I Want': What's
Missing
from
Gallagher's
Picture
of
Non-reductive
Cognitive
Science,
Australasian
Philosophical Review 2/2: 209-13.
Bitbol, M. and S. Gallagher 2018. Autopoiesis and the Free Energy Principle. Comment on
Ramsted, Badcock, and Friston, Physics of Life Review 24: 24-6.
Brancazio, N. 2019. Irreducible Aspects of Embodiment: Situating Scientist and Subject,
Australasian Philosophical Review 2/2: 219-23.
Bruineberg, J., J. Kiverstein and E. Rietveld 2016. The Anticipating Brain Is Not a Scientist: The
Free-Energy Principle from an Ecological Enactive Perspective. Synthese.
Casta~neda, H. N. H. 1966. He: A Study in the Logic of Self-consciousness, Ratio 8: 130-57.
Chemero, A., 2009. Radical Embodied Cognitive Science, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Clark, A. 2017. How to Knit Your Own Markov Blanket, in Philosophy and Predictive Processing,
eds T. K. Metzinger and W. Wiese, Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group.
Dewhurst, J. 2019. Context-Sensitive Ontologies for a Non-reductionist Cognitive Neuroscience,
Australasian Philosophical Review 2/2: 224-8.
Einstein, G. 2012. Situated Neuroscience: Exploring Biologies of Diversity, in Neurofeminism:
Issues at the Intersection of Feminist Theory and Cognitive Science, eds R. Bluhm, A. J.
Jacobson, H. L. Maibom, London: Palgrave-Macmillan.
Friston, K. 2013. Life as We Know It, Journal of the Royal Society Interface 10/86: 20130475.
Friston, K. 2010. The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory? Nature Reviews Neuroscience,
11(2), 127-138.
Gadamer, H. G. 2004. Truth and Method, trans. J. Weinsheimer and D. G. Marshall, London:
Bloomsbury.
Gallagher S. 1997. Mutual Enlightenment: Recent Phenomenology in Cognitive Science, Journal of
Consciousness Studies 4/3: 195-214.
Gallagher, S. 2003. Phenomenology and Experimental Design, Journal of Consciousness Studies 10/
9-10: 85-99.
Gallagher, S. 2017. Enactivist Interventions: Rethinking the Mind, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gallagher, S. 2018. New Mechanisms and the Enactivist Concept of Constitution, in The
Metaphysics of Consciousness, ed. M. P. Guta, Routledge, London.
Gallagher, Shaun. 2019. Rethinking Nature: Phenomenology and a Non-reductionist Cognitive
Science, Australasian Philosophical Review 2/2: 125-37.
Gallagher, S. and M. Allen 2016. Active Inference, Enactivism and the Hermeneutics of Social
Cognition, Synthese 195/6: 2627-2648.
Gallagher, S., D. Hutto, J. Slaby and J. Cole 2013. The Brain as Part of an Enactive System,
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 36/4: 421-2.
Gallagher,
S.,
L.
Reinerman-Jones,
B.
Janz,
P.
Bockelman
and
J.
Trempler
2015.
The
Neurophenomenology of Awe and Wonder, London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Gallagher,
S.
and
Jesper
Brøsted
Sørensen.
2006.
Experimenting
with
Phenomenology,
Consciousness and Cognition 15/1: 119-34.
Hipolito, I. 2019. Perception is Not Always and Everywhere Inferential, Australasian Philosophical
Review 2/2: 184-8.
Hohwy, J. 2013. The Predictive Mind. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Hohwy, J. 2016. The Self-evidencing Brain, Nous 50(2): 259-285.
Hohwy, J. 2019. Phenomenology and Cognitive Science: Don't Fear the Reductionist Bogey-Man,
Australasian Philosophical Review 2/2: 138-44.
244
S. GALLAGHER

Husserl, E. 1970. Cartesian Meditations, trans. D. Cairns, The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Karmarkar, U. R. and D. V. Buonomano 2007. Timing in the Absence of Clocks: Encoding Time
in Neural Network States, Neuron 53: 427-38.
Kirchhoff, M. D. 2017. From Mutual Manipulation to Cognitive Extension: Challenges and
Implications, Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 16/5: 863-78.
Kirchhoff, M. D. 2018. Autopoiesis, Free Energy, and the Life-Mind Continuity Thesis, Synthese
195/6: 2519-40.
Latour, B. 2005. Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-Network-Theory, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Macarthur, D. 2004. Naturalizing the Human or Humanizing Nature: Science, Nature and the
Supernatural, Erkenntnis 61/1: 29-51.
Macarthur, D. 2019. Remarks on Gallagher's Enactivist Philosophy of Nature, Australasian
Philosophical Review 2/2: 179-83.
McGivern, P. 2019. Gallagher on Non-reductive Naturalism: Complementarity, Integration or
Multi-scale Science?, Australasian Philosophical Review 2/2: 159-70.
Meyer, R. 2018. The Non-mechanistic Option: Defending Dynamical Explanations, The British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science, doi.org/10.1093/bjps/axy034.
Meyer, R. 2019. Embracing the Meta-Copernican Turn: Non-decomposition and Mechanistic
Explanations, Australasian Philosophical Review 2/2: 214-18.
Northoff, G. and F. Bermpohl 2004. Cortical Midline Structures and the Self, Trends in Cognitive
Sciences 8: 102-7.
Pain, R. 2019. Phenomenology and Cognitive Neuroscience: Can a Process Ontology Help Resolve
the Impasse?, Australasian Philosophical Review 2/2: 204-8.
Ramstead, M. J. D., P. B. Badcock and K. J. Friston 2018. Answering Schr€odinger's Question: A
Free-Energy Formulation, Physics of Life Reviews 24: 1-16.
Rietveld, E. and J. Kiverstein 2014. A Rich Landscape of Affordances, Ecological Psychology 26/4:
325-52.
Sachs, C. 2019. The Role of Non-reductive Naturalism: Cognitive Science or Phenomenology?,
Australasian Philosophical Review 2/2: 229-33.
Sanches de Oliveira, G. 2019. Theory, Practice, and Non-reductive (Meta)Science, Australasian
Philosophical Review 2/2: 199-203.
Sims, A. 2019. Agency and the Metaphysics of Nature, Australasian Philosophical Review 2/2:
194-8.
Smith, M. 2019. A Tale of Two Gaps, Australasian Philosophical Review 2/2: 189-93.
Varela, F. J. 1996. Neurophenomenology: A Methodological Remedy for the Hard Problem,
Journal of Consciousness Studies 3/4: 330-50.
Vazquez, M. J. C. and M. Wheeler 2019. Minding Nature: Gallagher and the Relevance of
Phenomenology to Cognitive Science, Australasian Philosophical Review 2/2: 145-58.
Vogeley, K. and S. Gallagher 2011. The Self in the Brain, in The Oxford Handbook of the Self, ed.
S. Gallagher, Oxford: Oxford University Press: 111-36.
Woodward, J. 1997. Explanation, Invariance, and Intervention, Philosophy of Science 64: S26-S41.
AUSTRALASIAN PHILOSOPHICAL REVIEW
245

