Inquiry
An Interdisciplinary Journal of Philosophy
ISSN: 0020-174X (Print) 1502-3923 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/sinq20
Isolating primitive emotional phenomenology in
the 'lab' of ﬁction
Aarón Álvarez-González
To cite this article: Aarón Álvarez-González (26 Jul 2023): Isolating primitive emotional
phenomenology in the 'lab' of ﬁction, Inquiry, DOI: 10.1080/0020174X.2023.2240866
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/0020174X.2023.2240866
Published online: 26 Jul 2023.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 121
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=sinq20

Isolating primitive emotional phenomenology in the
'lab' of ﬁction
Aarón Álvarez-González
Department of Philosophy, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
ABSTRACT
There is an important debate in the philosophy of mind that has roots in the
phenomenological tradition, namely: what are the primitive forms of
consciousness, that is, what are the fundamental ingredients or aspects of
consciousness. This paper wants to contribute to partially answering this
general question by providing an answer to a required sub-question within
this question: is emotional phenomenology fundamental? I will answer in the
aﬃrmative and will oﬀer an argument focused on contemplative emotions
elicited by ﬁction. Another type of contemplative emotions, namely, esthetic
emotions, have been invoked in the literature but I will argue that the
phenomenology of emotions elicited by ﬁction, given their continuity and
sameness in kind with the phenomenology of garden variety emotions, are
more dialectically eﬃcient vis-à-vis the debate on the irreducibility of
emotional phenomenology.
ARTICLE HISTORY Received 5 February 2023; Accepted 6 July 2023
KEYWORDS Primitive emotional phenomenology; quasi-emotion; ﬁction
1. Introduction
There is an important debate in the philosophy of mind that has roots in
the phenomenological tradition (Brentano [1874] 1973; Kriegel 2017),
namely: what are the primitive forms of consciousness, that is, what are
the fundamental ingredients or aspects of consciousness.1 The question
is: what are the elements or aspects of consciousness that we need to
posit to explain a given explanandum, the stream of consciousness, our
inner mental phenomenal life. For instance, some people in the debate
have argued that the only ingredients or elements we need to posit are
© 2023 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
CONTACT Aarón Álvarez-González
aaron.estribor@gmail.com
Department of Philosophy, Uni-
versity of Barcelona, Barcelona 08001, Spain
1I use 'ingredient of consciousness' and 'element of consciousness' because I want to remain neutral on
the question of whether consciousness is atomistic or holistic. If the former, the stream of conscious-
ness would be a molecular phenomenon formed by atomic constituents. If the latter, then there would
not be any atomic element, but diﬀerent aspects of the same substance, so to speak.
INQUIRY
https://doi.org/10.1080/0020174X.2023.2240866

sensorial ones, and, hence, the stream of consciousness could be
explained just mentioning sensorial consciousness broadly understood:
consciousness of colors, forms, textures, smells, visceral movements, pro-
prioceptive states ... (e.g. Prinz 2011). For other contestants in the debate,
we need to invoke non-sensorial forms of consciousness, like cognitive
phenomenology (e.g. Pitt 2004).
One way of understanding the debate is in terms of grounding
(Schaﬀer 2009). The idea of metaphysical grounding, as it is orthodoxically
understood, is that many things exist, but only few things are fundamental.
The former would be derivative from the latter which would be derivative
of even more fundamental things until we reach fundamental bedrock:
ungrounded grounds. Thus, someone could say that chairs exist as deriva-
tive objects, reducible to molecules which, in turn, are reducible to atoms
which, in turn, are reducible to subatomic elements. Both chairs and suba-
tomic particles exist, but whereas the former are derivative, the latter are
fundamental.
One of the advantages of framing the debate in terms of grounding is
that it makes available a kind of explanation, metaphysical explanation.
Grounding relations are said to be explanatory. They concern a metaphys-
ical form of explanation in which 'the explanans or explanantia are consti-
tutive of the explanandum, or that the explanandum's holding consists in
nothing more than the obtaining of the explanans or explanantia' (Fine
2012, 39). Metaphysical explanation would diﬀer but complement
causal explanation. Thus, settling the question of what are the primitive
elements or ingredients of consciousness matters not only for causal
psychological explanations, but also for the metaphysical explanation of
the mind, that is, for adjudicating issues about the basic ontology of
psychology.
Applying the idea of grounding to the question under discussion: the
perceptualists about phenomenal consciousness, for instance, may say
that cognitive phenomenology exists, but it is derivative from the more
fundamental perceptual phenomenology (e.g. Pautz 2013). This paper
wants to contribute to partially answer this general question concerning
what the fundamental elements or aspects of consciousness are. It will do
so by providing an answer to a required sub-question within this ques-
tion: is emotional phenomenology a fundamental or a derivative type of
phenomenology?2
2To prevent misunderstandings, it is worth emphasizing that the question of whether emotional phe-
nomenology is fundamental, or derivative, is relative to the debate on what are the fundamental var-
ieties of consciousness. That is, one can hold that emotional phenomenology is primitive but be a
2
A. ÁLVAREZ-GONZÁLEZ

This question is not new. As it has been said, it has roots in the phe-
nomenological tradition as a part of the more general question on the
fundamental varieties of consciousness. More recently, several philoso-
phers in the analytic domain have contended about it. We can distinguish
two positions, the reductivist and the non-reductivist. All agree that
emotional phenomenology exists, the question is, then, how it exists,
namely, as derivative (reductivist) or as fundamental (non-reductivist). I
will argue for the claim that emotional phenomenology is fundamental,
that is, primitive. Given the aforementioned explanatory role of funda-
mental elements, that would make emotional phenomenology a funda-
mental phenomenal kind in the basic ontology of human and animal
consciousness.
In section 1, I will frame the debate and examine the diﬀerent positions
in the recent literature. In section 2, I will set the ground to announce my
position which will be focused on the importance of contemplative
emotions for the debate and, particularly, the importance of contempla-
tive emotions elicited by ﬁction. Another type of contemplative emotions,
namely, esthetic emotions, has been invoked in the literature in the aid of
non-reductionism about emotional phenomenology (Mitchell 2020). I will
try to show that emotions elicited by ﬁction, which have not been
invoked to my knowledge, are a type of contemplative emotions more
eﬀective, dialectically speaking, in aiding the non-reductionist. Though
ﬁction-elicited emotions are not the only opened dialectical route for
the antireductionist, they are particularly appropriate for that purpose
since they give us particularly favorable conditions to isolate emotions
from conative elements and there are robust similarities between
ﬁction-elicited emotions and their garden variety counterparts. In any
case, both types of contemplative emotions, ﬁction-elicited emotions
and esthetic emotions, can work in tandem for serving the non-reduction-
ist's thesis.
In section 3, I will put contemplative emotions elicited by ﬁction to
work for the non-reductionist position on emotional phenomenology, iso-
lating through them primitive emotional phenomenology. After that, in
section 4, I will assess what seem to be the initial consequences of my
arguments for ongoing debates on the nature of emotion. I will assess
physicalist about the ultimate nature of reality. In other words, one can believe in the primitive exist-
ence of emotional phenomenology in the context of the debate on what are the fundamental varieties
of consciousness. However, one can believe that the only fundamental thing in absolute terms is phys-
ical reality. Thus, even if emotional phenomenology is a fundamental type of phenomenology, in com-
parison, for instance, with moral phenomenology; phenomenology in general would not be as
fundamental as matter.
INQUIRY
3

what theories of emotion are initially more plausible under the light of my
results and which ones are ruled out. As it is known, one's conditional to
perform modus ponens is another's same conditional to perform modus
tollens. I want to depart from arguably intuitive premises, based on our
phenomenology of ﬁction consumption, and from them derive the
thesis that emotional phenomenology is primitive. Now, from my con-
siderations about the primitiveness of emotional phenomenology, it
follows that certain theories of emotion are plausibly true (e.g. the attitu-
dinal theory of emotion) whereas other theories of emotion are ruled out
(e.g. the judgemental theory of emotion). Those who have independent
reasons to reject my conclusions, namely, that certain theories of
emotion are not the case, would deny my antecedent analysis or, at
least, would have more resistance to embrace it. However, even for
those who reject the analysis, the argument is still interesting, since it
shows what reasons we have for it and what theories of emotion follow
from that way of understanding emotional phenomenology in ﬁctional
contexts.
2. Reductivism vs. non-reductivism about emotional
phenomenology
Imagine you are experiencing an episode of joy about receiving some
grant. Question: is this emotionally conscious episode reducible to
other conscious experiences like conative experiences (e.g. the desire of
receiving that grant), cognitive experiences (e.g. the conscious judgement
that receiving the grant is good), the feeling of bodily changes (e.g.
feeling an accelerated heart rate and breath)? Or, on the contrary, is
there an irreducible emotional aspect or element? The answer to these
questions is supposed to be generalizable. If yes to the latter question,
then emotional phenomenology is primitive. If yes to the former question,
then emotional phenomenology is derivative or reducible to more funda-
mental types of consciousness.
Let me introduce the contenders. In the reductive side we have tra-
ditional analysis of emotions that assimilate their phenomenal character
to some other mental state's one: emotional phenomenology = conscious
evaluative judgements' phenomenology (Nussbaum 2003; Solomon
1976), emotional phenomenology = feelings of bodily changes (James
1884; Prinz 2004), etc. More directly aware of the question under discus-
sion in this paper, we ﬁnd Uriah Kriegel's reductive analysis of emotional
phenomenology in his Varieties of Consciousness (Kriegel 2015). On the
4
A. ÁLVAREZ-GONZÁLEZ

other side, we have those authors who hold a non-reductive analysis of
emotional phenomenology, like Arnaud Dewalque (2017), Jonathan
Mitchell (2020) and Michelle Montague (2009). According to them,
emotional phenomenology is primitive, that is, a fundamental variety of
consciousness non-reducible to other fundamental varieties and on a
par with them.
In the following subsections I am going to present the recent
exchanges in the current debate between non-reductivist and reducti-
vists. The ﬁrst most developed argument for non-reductivism in the ana-
lytic tradition is due to Montague (2009). Partly as a response to
Montague's argument, Kriegel (2015) has presented his own reductive
argument. As a response to Kriegel, Dewalque (2017) and Mitchell
(2020) have presented their own non-reductive approach to emotional
phenomenology. I will present all these views respecting their chronologi-
cal order and their dialectical dependencies.
Though I consider that Montague's proposal is not successful defend-
ing the claim that emotional phenomenology is primitive, I think Kriegel's
proposal is seriously challenged by Dewalque's and Mitchell's criticism.
Besides, and this is the contribution of this article, there is logical space
for one more argument in favor of emotional non-reductivism that has
not been explored yet by the authors mentioned. This is my argument.
It is based on emotions elicited by ﬁction as a special case of contempla-
tive emotions whose existence can be explained only if we grant that
emotional phenomenology is primitive.
2.1. Initial non-reductivism: Montague
Montague (2009) argues that positing primitive emotional phenomenol-
ogy is a plausible theoretical option given the considerations she
adduces. The most plausible candidates for reducing emotions, given
the orthodoxy of Humean psychology (Smith 1994), are beliefs and
desires or pairs of them. Montague starts noting that emotions and cog-
nitions (beliefs, judgements, etc.) have diﬀerent inferential sensibilities. In
Kriegel's terms: while belief contexts seem to be opaque, emotional con-
texts seem to be hyper opaque (Kriegel 2015). Consider:
Case A
(1) I believe that Andrea won the grant
(2) Adrea's winning the grant = my losing the grant
INQUIRY
5

(3) I believe that I lost the grant
Case A*
(1) I believe that Andrea won the grant
(2) I am aware that Adrea's winning the grant = my losing the grant
(3) I believe that I lost the grant
Whereas the reasoning in Case A is not valid, because I may fail to know
premise (2), the reason in case A* is valid, that is, rational. If I am rational
and I come to know that Adrea's winning the grant = my losing the grant,
and I know that Andrea won the grant, then I am rationally compelled to
believe that I lost the grant. The logical schema instantiated in Case A*,
could be fed, if we have rational beliefs (i.e. non-contradictory), with what-
ever belief and the result will always be the same. Now, contrast this with
case B and B*:
Case B
(1) I am happy that Andrea won the grant
(2) Adrea's winning the grant = my losing the grant
(3) I am happy that I lost the grant
Case B*
(1) I am happy that Andrea won the grant
(2) I am aware that Adrea's winning the grant = my losing the grant
(3) I am happy that I lost the grant
While there is a diﬀerence between case A and case A* in regard to
their rationality, it seems that both B and B* are invalid. Clearly, in Case
B, from (1) and (2) it does not follow (3), but neither does it in case B *.
From the fact that I know that Adrea's winning the grant = my losing
the grant, and that I am factively happy that Andrea won the grant, it
does not follow that I am happy that I lost the grant. I can be sad
about it.
Montague thinks that this is an initial clue to consider that emotional
experience must be primitive, that is, irreducible to cognitive phenomen-
ology. Otherwise, emotional phenomenology would inherit its inferential
sensitivities from the cognitive one. But this is not the case. Thus, accord-
ing to Montague, Emotional phenomenology must be primitive.
6
A. ÁLVAREZ-GONZÁLEZ

Montague acknowledges that desires could also explain the inferential
anomalies of emotional contexts. However, desires are neither suﬃcient
nor necessary for emotional phenomenology. On the one hand, I can
desire something, like living one hundred years, without feeling any
emotion. On the other hand, if I am happy that Andrea got the grant, I
do not desire it, since this has already happened. Thus, Montague
claims, emotional phenomenology must be primitive.
2.2. Kriegel's phenomenal realm and emotional phenomenology
Uriah Kriegel (2015) has tried to oﬀer a list with the primitive elements of
consciousness, that is, a list of the basic building block or aspects of con-
sciousness that you have to invoke to explain the stream of conscious-
ness. He proposes six primitive elements: perceptual, imaginative,
algedonic, cognitive, entertaining and conative. The previous are the
basic ingredients or aspects of consciousness while other types of phe-
nomenology, like emotional or moral phenomenology, would be deriva-
tive from those. These primitive elements are phenomenal attitudinal
features of consciousness. That is, these phenomenal attitudes contrast
with their phenomenal content, namely with the object, proposition or
situation presented by them. Thus, those types of phenomenology refer
to the what-it-is-like of the mode in which the mental state presents its
content rather than to the what-it-is-like of the content itself. Take, as
an example, cognitive phenomenology. According to Kriegel, cognitive
phenomenology presents-as-true its contents, for instance, that 2 + 2 = 4.
Thus, it is the phenomenology of the mode of presentation or mental atti-
tude (i.e. presenting-as-true), instead of the phenomenology of the
content (i.e. that 2 + 2 = 4), that interests Kriegel. The reason for the
emphasis in the phenomenology of the attitude instead of that of the
content is to be found in the fact that it seems to be more fundamental.
Whereas having the phenomenology of belief located at the content
would rule out cases of animals and children's beliefs who lack the
concept of TRUTH for predicating it of propositions, having it located in
the attitude would allow beings who lack the concept of TRUTH to
have beliefs. The concept of TRUTH would just be an explication of
what is encoded in the way cognitive phenomenology presents its
contents.
Perceptual and algedonic types of phenomenology, that is, sensorial
types of phenomenology, are taken for granted, in the sense that they
are manifest. By contrast, cognitive, conative and entertaining types of
INQUIRY
7

phenomenology are more controversial and, hence, Kriegel provides
diﬀerent arguments for each of them.
Sensorial phenomenology includes perceptual, (sensorially) imagina-
tive and algedonic types of phenomenology. Perceptual phenomenology
presents-as-existent its contents. A phenomenal mental state is sensorial
when it has been produced by sensory or bodily systems (visual, auditory,
olfactory, gustatory, tactile, proprioceptive, etc.). An example of percep-
tual phenomenology: it presents-as-existent my computer while I am
writing. Sensorial imagination shares the contents of perceptual experi-
ence, their source is sensorial, but not the attitudinal features. What is
essential to the what-it-is-like of sensorial imaginative phenomenology,
what diﬀerentiates it from perception, is its presenting as-non-existent
its contents. For instance, if I see a banana on the table, it is presented
as-existent to me, here and now. By contrast, if I sensorially imagine a
banana on the table then it is presented as-non-existent to me. Finally,
algedonic phenomenology, which has to do with pleasure and pain, is
characterized by Kriegel as a mode of presentation as-good/bad of their
contents in a sensorial way. An example of algedonic phenomenology:
it presents-as-good sensorially this piece of cake that I am eating right
now.
Now let's focus on non-sensorial phenomenology, which includes cog-
nitive, conative and entertaining phenomenology. Cognitive phenomenol-
ogy presents as-true its contents in a non-sensorial way. An example of
cognitive phenomenology: It presents-as-true the content that 2 + 2 = 4.
Conative phenomenology is characterized by Kriegel, following Brentano,
as value-committed. In particular, conative phenomenology presents, in
a non-sensorial way, as-good/bad its contents. A more precise character-
ization of conative phenomenology is deciding-and-then-trying phenom-
enology. An example of this kind of phenomenology could be that it
presents-as-good good health and, hence, it presents-as-right physical
exercise and as worth trying. Entertaining phenomenology consists in a
phenomenal state that merely-presents (neutrally, without any commit-
ment) its contents in a non-sensorial way. It does not commit the experi-
encer neither with the desirability nor with the truth of the contents. This
type of phenomenology is, as we will see, important to our project, since
Kriegel considers that imaginings belong to this kind and it is widely
accepted that the proper response to ﬁctions' content is to imagine
them. An example of entertaining phenomenology happens when it
merely presents some content, without commitment to its truth or
8
A. ÁLVAREZ-GONZÁLEZ

desirability. For instance, I entertained Schopenhauer's metaphysics last
night. I bear it in mind without committing myself to its truth or
desirability.
According to Kriegel emotional phenomenology is derivative from the
aforementioned types of phenomenology. Cognitive, perceptual and
both sensorial and non-sensorial imaginative types of phenomenology
could provide emotions with their particular object as their cognitive
bases (Deonna and Teroni 2012). The particular object (e.g. a predator)
of the emotion (e.g. fear) is provided to the emoter by its cognitive
bases (perception, imagination, memory, etc.) and upon that particular
object, the formal object of the emotion supervenes (following with the
example, danger). Algedonic phenomenology could explain emotions'
hedonic tone, their valence. Lastly, conative phenomenology could
explain emotions' action readiness. Thus, some combination of Kriegel's
element would be both necessary and suﬃcient for every emotional
episode.
I agree with Kriegel's diagnosis of Montague's argument, which I recon-
struct in the following lines to give the reader a complete grasp of the
history of this debate.
Kriegel explains what seems to be the diﬀerent inferential sensibilities
between beliefs and emotions in terms of a distinction between facts and
events. The individuation of facts is ﬁner grained than the individuation of
events. Thus, the facts mentioned in premise (2) in cases B and B* would
not be identical. They could not be more diﬀerent: one fact has to do with
Andrea's success, another with my failure. Thus, premises (2) in cases B
and B* would make an equivocation between fact and event and hence
it would be false. By contrast, in case A* premise (2) is still true because
it seems that the identity is unambiguously taken to be between the
same event under two diﬀerent descriptions.
Given the factivity of being fully aware of facts, it cannot be true that I
am aware of the identity of two dissimilar facts. That would explain why
case B* leads to a false conclusion. The falsity of the conclusion would be
due to a false premise, (2), and not to an invalid schema. In other words, it
is not true that from my knowing that Andrea's success = my failure and
from my happiness that Andrea succeeded, it follows my happiness that I
fail. From the fact that I am happy that p (read as a fact), it does not follow
that I am happy that q (read as a fact), unless p = q (read as facts) and I am
aware of that. That Andrea succeeded cannot be equal to the fact that I
failed. They are just diﬀerent facts instantiated by the same event describ-
able as Andrea's success or my failure.
INQUIRY
9

Another possibility is that I may be fully aware of diﬀerent aspects of
the same event and ambivalent about them. Thus, I can construe (2) in
both cases B and B* as targeting an event instead of a fact. If I construe
case B* as targeting the event as a whole and not this or that aspect of
it, then I am being irrational if I hold ambivalent emotions to it. I can
be ambivalent about diﬀerent aspects of the same event (i.e. have
diﬀerent feelings for diﬀerent facts instantiated by the same event)
without being irrational, something I cannot do on pain of irrationality
with respect to the whole event.
Summing up, if we construe case B* as targeting facts, then the false
conclusion, (3), would be due to a false premise, (2), and not due to the
invalidity of the schema. By contrast, if we construe case B* as targeting
the same event and that event obtains, and the rest of premises are
true, given the validity of the schema, if I am rational, the conclusion
(3) would be true. If I am happy about an event, not this or that aspect,
then I should be happy about it under whatever description I gave of
the event, on the proviso, of course, that I know that the diﬀerent descrip-
tions are descriptions of the same event. Thus, either conclusion (3) in case
B* is false due to a false premise (2) when read as referring to facts; or con-
clusion (3) follows from the premises, when read as referring to events,
and failing to infer it would be due to my irrationality. Therefore,
emotional
phenomenology
is
inferentially
alike
to
cognitive
phenomenology.
After having refuted Montague, Kriegel considers diﬀerent ways in
which his dialectical rival could argue for the primitiveness of emotional
phenomenology. He considers conceivability arguments in which you
could conceive of a partially zombiﬁed subject who would lack any
type of phenomenology except for emotional phenomenology. He
found those attempts as failures and he is probably right given that
emotions have cognitive bases, that is, emotions cannot provide them-
selves with their own object (Deonna and Teroni 2012). So, it is impossible
that you can have an emotion without any other mental state (e.g. belief,
perception, imagining ...) that provides it with its particular object. I
cannot fear a predator unless I see it, imagine it, etc. Perception, imagin-
ation, testimony ... are among the possible necessary cognitive bases of
emotion. Kriegel also confesses that he is unable to conceive a phenom-
enal contrast to show the primitiveness of emotional phenomenology, as
he does to prove the primitiveness of conative phenomenology. Thus, he
ends up concluding that emotional phenomenology is best understood
10
A. ÁLVAREZ-GONZÁLEZ

as reducible to his phenomenal primitives which has, besides, the advan-
tage of being the most parsimonious option.
2.3. Non-reductionist response to Kriegel: Dewalque and Mitchell
Arnaud Dewalque (2017) and Jonathan Mitchell (2020) oﬀer irreducible
analysis of emotional phenomenology that address directly Kriegel's
reductive arguments. Let me brieﬂy introduce their arguments to immedi-
ately elaborate on how my own argument diﬀers from them though it is
complementary with them.
Dewalque basically shows that cognitive phenomenology is not
suﬃcient for emotional phenomenology, though it may be necessary
for some emotions (secondary emotions, like shame, admiration, etc.).
Besides, he shows that conative phenomenology is neither necessary
nor suﬃcient for emotional phenomenology. Given that cognitive and
conative phenomenology are at the core of Kriegel's reduction of
emotional phenomenology, Dewalque takes himself as having refuted
Kriegel.
To show that cognitive phenomenology is not suﬃcient for emotional
phenomenology, he just appeals to cases in which one can have non-
emotional evaluative judgements, like 'War is unjust', without being
moved by them.
Given that it is a very plausible assumption that a desire does not entail
an emotion (i.e. given that desires are not suﬃcient for emotion), Dewal-
que focuses on proving that desires are not necessary for emotions (i.e.
that an emotion does not entail a desire). To do so he mentions two
emotions as counterexamples to the claim that emotion entails desires:
surprise and resignation. In both cases you have an emotion without a
desire. In the former case you cannot have a desire that explains the
emotion, because the emotions represent novelty, something you have
not considered before it and you cannot desire what you have not con-
sidered. The latter case is characterized by the absence of desire, by con-
formity to how the world already is.
Mitchell's arguments for non-reductivism about emotional phenomen-
ology targets both the necessity and the suﬃciency claim in Kriegel's
analysis. Thus, for instance, cognitive, algedonic and/or conative phenom-
enology, central in Kriegel's reduction, would not be either necessary or
suﬃcient for emotional phenomenology. To show the non-necessity of
Kriegel's
elements
or
a
combination
of
them
for
emotional
phenomenology he uses what he calls subtractive arguments. That is,
INQUIRY
11

arguments in which you are supposed to subtract a combination of Krie-
gel's elements from an emotional episode without losing the emotional
phenomenal character. Mitchell conceives a contemplative esthetic
emotion about an abstract drawing. He then subtracts Kriegel's elements
and shows that the phenomenal experience is still recognizable as
emotional.
To show the insuﬃciency of Kriegel's elements, or a combination of
them, for emotional phenomenology he uses a phenomenal contrast
argument. He imagines two phenomenal twins in terms of Kriegel's
elements at the dentist's chair. However, there is a diﬀerence between
them: though one is anxious the other is not. Thus, even though they
have sameness of Kriegel elements, they have diﬀerence in the overall
phenomenology which is plausibly explained by diﬀerences in the
emotional phenomenal character.
I am not completely convinced about Mitchell's conclusion after apply-
ing his phenomenal contrast. It seems to me that there is going to be conﬂ-
icted intuitions, something acknowledged by Mitchell himself. Some
would say, given the discomfort of dental surgery, the desire of the discom-
fort to cease (conative) + the belief that one does not know whether it
would cease soon or not + the psychological pain that this uncertainty
brings are suﬃcient for the anxiety of both subjects and hence Mitchell's
scenario, in which one subject is anxious whereas the other is not while
both have the same combination of Kriegel's elements, would not be poss-
ible. Others would deny the implication. I, myself, feel conﬂicted about the
case so, instead of trying to adjudicate between these two options, I
suspend judgements on this thought experiment. However, after provid-
ing my own argument, I think we gain some support to the anti-reduction-
ist conclusion in favor of which Mitchell argues.
3. Contemplative emotions: ﬁction-elicited emotions and
esthetic emotions
3.1. The diﬀerence between ﬁction-elicited emotions and esthetic
emotions
I sympathize with both Dewalque's and Mitchell's arguments. However, I
think I have a new argument for primitive emotional phenomenology to
oﬀer, which appears to be diﬀerent from the above presented though it
may be complementary with them. I will take ﬁction as a case study which
allows the isolation of primitive emotional phenomenology.
12
A. ÁLVAREZ-GONZÁLEZ

We have seen that Mitchell appeals to esthetic emotions to support the
irreducibility of emotional phenomenology. Now, someone could ask
what my contribution in this paper adds to this debate, when Mitchell
has already invoked contemplative emotions against the reductionist
about emotional phenomenology. As an answer: the rationale of my con-
tribution is that even though some type of contemplative emotions has
been invoked, namely, esthetic emotion, not all types of contemplative
emotions work equally nor behave dialectically alike vis-à-vis the
debate on the irreducibility of emotional phenomenology. In this paper,
I want to focus on ﬁction-elicited emotions.
Fiction-elicited emotions are a type of contemplative emotion.3 Con-
templative emotions are those emotions that lack a link to action and
that have been used by Tappolet (2016) to defend the claim that conative
elements are not a necessary condition for emotions. Why? Because when
one emotes contemplatively one is not disposed to act in any way, nor
has arguably any desire or wish. From the latter it would follow that cona-
tive elements are not necessary for emotions. Both esthetic emotions (e.g.
admiration towards the esthetic properties of the work of art, awe about
the beauty of the artwork, etc.) and ﬁction-elicited emotions (e.g. fear
about Stephen King's IT, sorrow for Anna Karenina's fate, etc.) seem to
be diﬀerent types of contemplative emotions.
Both are contemplative emotions, but for diﬀerent reasons. The
former's contemplativeness seems to come from the disinterested
aspect of esthetic contemplation (Hilgers 2017). The latter's contempla-
tiveness seems to come not from the disinterestedness of aﬀect, but
from the characteristic cognitive bases that ﬁction-elicited emotions
take (Teroni 2019). As we will see, ﬁction-elicited emotions' cognitive
bases are either belief with a ﬁctional operator (e.g. the belief that it is
true that, according to the ﬁction, Bruce Wayne's parents were murdered)
3Derek Matravers (2014) argues that there is no clear divide between our encounters with ﬁction and
non-ﬁction narratives. He argues for what he considers a more robust distinction: emotions elicited
by representation and emotions elicited by confrontation, where the former precludes action since it
is elicited by a representation which stands for an absent object, whereas the latter involves action
since one directly confronts a given object. This distinction is supposedly capable of explaining puz-
zling aspects of our interaction with ﬁction without presupposing that ﬁction and the mechanisms
of ﬁction-understanding and appreciation are diﬀerent from those involved in engagement with
non-ﬁctional works. My point is also compatible with alternative ways of understanding ﬁction as
Matravers does. I want to take ﬁctions with a speciﬁc content and only those ﬁctions as a case
study, namely: ﬁctions whose intentional content is about characters and events that do not exist
in the sense in which the current pope and his life exist. These emotions are clearly about a represen-
tation in Matravers' sense and they lack a link to action (in the sense speciﬁed at the end of this
section).
INQUIRY
13

or imaginings (e.g. simply imagine that Bruce Wayne's parents were
murdered).
My invocation of ﬁction-elicited emotions goes beyond, or diﬀers from,
Tappolet's general claims about contemplative emotions and Mitchell's
invocation of esthetic emotions. Regarding the former, my invocation
of ﬁction-elicited emotions goes beyond Tappolet's thesis that contem-
plative emotions show that conative elements are not necessary for
emotions, because I show that it is not only that conative elements are
not necessary for emotion but also that even if some of Kriegel's elements
are necessary for emotional phenomenology, none of them is solely or
jointly suﬃcient for emotional phenomenology.
Regarding Mitchell's invocation of esthetic emotions, I take that an
argument focused on ﬁction-elicited emotion is dialectically stronger
than one focused on esthetic emotions. Why? Because esthetic emotion
can be considered a borderline case of aﬀective experience, and some
can even doubt that it is an aﬀective experience at all but sui generis feel-
ings of esthetic value. On the contrary, it seems that there is a continuity
between
the
phenomenal
character
of
garden
variety
emotions
(e.g. 1. fear towards a real predator, 2. sorrow about injustices, etc.) and
ﬁction-elicited emotional experiences (e.g. 1*. fear towards an imagined
predator as in Alien vs. Predator, 2*. sorrow about imagined injustices as
in The Handmaid's Tale, etc.). It also seems that the phenomenology of
garden variety emotions and the one of ﬁction-elicited emotions
belong to the same phenomenal kind, that is, the similarities between
emotional phenomenology in ﬁctional contexts and in ordinary life are
robust enough as to leverage my metaphysical argument on the irredu-
cibility of emotional phenomenology. This is what I will argue in the sub-
sections that follow.
Before concluding this section, it is advisable to devote some time to
clarify the idea that ﬁction-elicited emotions lack a link to action. What
does this lack of a link to action mean? In paradigmatic garden-variety
emotions there is a link to action that targets the object/state of aﬀairs
the emotions is about. When one feels garden-variety sadness about a
particular situation, the link to action of the sadness targets the inten-
tional object of the emotion in a relevant sense, namely: repairing the
consequences of that situation. Take now the case of sadness about the
events depicted in the example we will be commenting on, namely: Man-
chester-by-the-sea directed by Kenneth Lonergan and released in 2016.
By contrast with the mentioned garden-variety sadness, in this ﬁctional
counterpart it seems that there is no clear action that relevantly targets
14
A. ÁLVAREZ-GONZÁLEZ

the situation depicted in the ﬁlm because that situation does not know-
ingly4 exist in the same way in which the situation picked up by my
garden-variety sadness exist.
Of course, one may say that after watching the ﬁlm I may be more careful
about the type of situation depicted in it, but this is a sense of 'link to action'
that is too broad because it does not target the intentional object of the
emotion: the token situation, because that token situation does not exist in
the relevant sense to be picked up by action. From now on, I will focus only
on this speciﬁc type of ﬁction-elicited emotion. This type of emotion clearly
lacks a link to action. Apart from that, I am not making any claim about the
nature of ﬁction in general or about the nature of all ﬁction-elicited emotions.
3.2. The counterpart principle for emotions elicited by ﬁction
Fiction-elicited emotions are governed by what I call the counterpart prin-
ciple. In a nutshell: for every garden-variety emotion, there is a ﬁction-eli-
cited emotion. This is an intuitive principle that seems manifestly true.
Think about a case of fear about a predator. You can easily imagine a
ﬁction in which the main character faces a predator. Think about the
grief you may have experienced about the end of a romantic relationship.
You can easily think about ﬁctions in which this kind of emotions are eli-
cited. And so on and so forth. The counterpart principle seems obvious:
ﬁctions seem to be able to elicit in principle the same variety of emotions
that we experience in normal contexts.
Ifthecounterpartprincipleisgenerallytrue,thenthereisapresumptionthat
my strategy for arguing in favor of the irreducibility of emotional phenomen-
ologyrelyingonemotionselicitedbyﬁctionisjustiﬁed.Inthenextsection,Iwill
argue that, given the unity between the phenomenology of garden-variety
and ﬁction-elicited emotions, we can safely reach metaphysical conclusions
about emotional phenomenology taking ﬁction as a source of evidence.
3.3. The unity of emotional phenomenology
An objection my strategy may ﬁnd is that emotions elicited by ﬁction are
contentious cases of emotion. Some have even claimed that they are not
4I have added this 'knowingly' to emphasize that it is important that the emotional subject knows or
believes that the intentional object of their ﬁction-elicited emotions does not exist in the sense in
which ordinary objects and events exist. That way, cases in which the emotional subject mistakenly
believes that a ﬁctional character exists and acts consequently, would not count as cases of contem-
plative emotions in my sense.
INQUIRY
15

real emotions (Walton 1978, 1993). For others, they are emotions with a
diﬀerent but similar functional proﬁle than their counterpart garden-
variety emotion (Currie 1989). Now, whereas it is true that emotions eli-
cited by ﬁction are a controversial case, what is clear is that we indeed
have feelings with an aﬀective phenomenal character in response to
ﬁction. Indeed, this is the object of generalized agreement even among
those who deny that emotions elicited by ﬁction are real emotions, like
Walton, as noted by Robert Stecker:
If all this is right, then the essential psychological state that occurs when we
'pity' a ﬁctional character is just this: vividly imagining a character's suﬀering
resulting in physiological changes that create strong feelings that have the phe-
nomenology of pity. This is the aspect of the psychological state that Walton,
Lamarque, and most others who have written about the paradox of ﬁction
agree about. (Stecker 2011, 303)
To strengthen this line of reasoning, let me take the so-called paradox of
ﬁction. The paradox of ﬁction is, precisely, what gives the impression that
emotion elicited by ﬁction is a contentious case. In what follows, I am
going to argue that my claim that the phenomenology of ﬁction-elicited
emotions remains the same in kind than garden-variety emotions' phe-
nomenology is compatible with whatever solution we oﬀer to the
paradox of ﬁction. In other words, my claim is compatible with whatever
proposition we deny in the inconsistent triad that gives rise to the
paradox, even if we deny that ﬁction-elicited emotions are emotions
stricto sensu. The neutrality of my claim in regards to our preferred sol-
ution to the paradox of ﬁction should be enough to convince us that
my appeal to the emotional phenomenology elicited by ﬁction, indepen-
dently of whether this phenomenology is suﬃcient for having a full-
ﬂedged emotion,5 is uncontentious.
The paradox of ﬁction was initially proposed by Radford as a problem
for the rationality of emotions directed towards ﬁctional characters and
events (Radford 1975). According to Radford, emotional responses are
rational only if their targets exist. Fictional characters do not exist. There-
fore, emotions towards ﬁctional characters are not rational. Nowadays, it
is currently acknowledged in the literature that there are two possible
readings of the paradox of ﬁction: the metaphysical and the normative
reading. Let's consider both versions of the paradox in turn.
5It may be that emotional phenomenology is necessary but not suﬃcient for having an emotion. For
instance, according to those who defend the motivational theory of emotion (Scarantino 2014), the
individuation conditions for emotion are not only given in terms of their phenomenology but also,
and crucially, in terms of their motivational proﬁle.
16
A. ÁLVAREZ-GONZÁLEZ

The Metaphysical Version of the Paradox of Fiction (MVPF)
(PF1) We feel genuine emotions directed at ﬁctional entities.
(PF2) We do not believe that ﬁctional entities exist.
(PF3) To feel genuine emotions, we must believe that these emotions are
directed at actually existing entities. (Teroni 2019, 113)
The Normative Version of the Paradox of Fiction (NVPF)
(PF1*) It is rational to feel genuine emotions directed at ﬁctional entities.
(PF2*) We do not believe that ﬁctional entities exist.
(PF3*) For an emotion to be rational, we must believe that it is directed at an
actually existing object. (Teroni 2019, 113)
The normal way of solving paradoxes expressed in inconsistent triads
consists in the rejection of one of the propositions which cannot be
accepted together with the other two. Thus, for every triad there are nor-
mally three possible solutions. I am going to show how the rejection of
every premise in every triad is compatible with the claim that the phe-
nomenology of ﬁction-elicited emotions remains the same in kind as
garden-variety emotions' phenomenology.
Let's ﬁrst take MVPF. (PF1)'s negation is: we do not feel genuine
emotions directed at ﬁctional entities. This is Walton's solution to the
paradox, where he claims that our emotional feelings towards ﬁction are
quasi-emotions, though they fall short of genuine emotions. The
common factor between genuine emotions and quasi-emotions elicited
by ﬁctions would be their identical or very similar phenomenology. The
mere fact that these two states share the same phenomenology is
suﬃcient for my dialectical purposes. If the phenomenology of emotional
responses to ﬁction and the phenomenology of garden-variety emotions
belong to the same phenomenal kind, then if ﬁction-elicited emotional
responses' phenomenology instantiates a primitive metaphysical kind,
so does garden variety emotions' phenomenology.
(PF2)'s negation is: we believe that ﬁctional entities exist. For instance, if
we were to believe that ﬁctional entities exist as counterfactual people,
places and events, then, our ﬁction-elicited emotions would not be
diﬀerent from our garden variety emotions. In that case, ﬁction-elicited
emotions would not be contentious.
(PF3)'s negation is: it is not true that to feel genuine emotions, we must
believe that these emotions are directed at actually existing entities. In
INQUIRY
17

that case, as in the previous one, our ﬁction-elicited emotions would not
be diﬀerent from our garden-variety emotions. Hence, the continuity
between them is guaranteed and so are the metaphysical conclusions
that we can make about both.
Let's now take NVPF. (PF1*)'s negation is: it is not rational to feel
genuine emotions directed at ﬁctional entities. Irrational emotions are
still emotions, so our thesis that the phenomenology of ﬁction remains
the same in kind as garden-variety emotions' phenomenology remains
true.
(PF2*)'s negation is: we do believe that ﬁctional entities exist. Again: If
we were to believe that ﬁctional entities exist as counterfactual people,
places and events, then, our ﬁction-elicited emotions would not be
diﬀerent from our garden variety emotions. In that case the former are
no longer problematic.
(PF3*)'s negation is: it is not true that for an emotion to be rational, we
must believe that it is directed at an actually existing object. Again: Rational
and irrational emotions share the same type of phenomenology,
emotional phenomenology, and, hence, there is continuity between them.
If as I have argued, ﬁction elicited emotions are dialectically stronger
than esthetic emotions vis-à-vis the debate on the irreducibility of
emotional phenomenology; and if the counterpart principle is true; and
if the claim that there is unity in emotional phenomenology between
garden-variety emotions and ﬁction-elicited emotions, independent of
our preferred solution to the paradox of ﬁction, is true; then we can
take ﬁction as a source of evidence to draw safe metaphysical conclusions
about emotional phenomenology. And I think that it is very plausible that
the antecedent of the previous conditional obtains.
4. Isolating primitive emotional phenomenology in the 'lab' of
ﬁction
In this section, I am going to show that some of Kriegel's elements are
necessary for explaining the emotional reactions of a ﬁction ﬁlm specta-
tor. Others, particularly conative phenomenology, are neither necessary
nor suﬃcient. However, none of them is individually or jointly suﬃcient
for explaining our spectator's whole stream of consciousness. In other
words, Kriegel's phenomenal inventory cannot explain our subject's
experience while engaging with ﬁction and experiencing emotional reac-
tions towards it. To explain it, we need to postulate primitive emotional
phenomenology.
18
A. ÁLVAREZ-GONZÁLEZ

4.1. Some essential features of emotion: their reactive character and
their hedonic tone
Several authors in the philosophy of emotion have emphasized that
emotions have cognitive bases (see, for instance, Deonna and Teroni
2012). Take an episode of fear about a predator. Emotions are such that
they cannot provide themselves with their intentional object. In this
case: fear is such that it cannot provide itself with its intentional object,
the predator. Emotions are reactive, not presentational. They react to the
stimuli presented by other mental states, namely: their cognitive bases.6
Following with our example: let's suppose that we are in the jungle and
see a dangerous predator approaching. In that case, our visual perceptual
experience is the cognitive base of our fear. It provides us with the inten-
tional object to emote about, to fear about. Thus, emotional phenomen-
ology is dependent on other types of phenomenology, namely: those that
play the role of their cognitive bases. Dependence is not equal to
reduction. The cognitive bases of emotion are necessary conditions for
the emotion but not suﬃcient ones. Thus, it is to be expected to ﬁnd
those phenomenal elements that play the role of cognitive bases of
emotions within Kriegel's inventory.
Emotions also have a hedonic tone.7 That is, emotions feel good or bad
depending on the type of emotion we are talking about. In the case of
fear, the hedonic tone is negative. So it is in the case of sadness,
disgust, etc. By contrast, in the case of joy, the hedonic tone is positive.
So it is in the case of admiration, excitement, etc. Thus, the phenomenol-
ogy of most of the emotions is essentially valenced and, hence, we will
ﬁnd another dependency of emotional phenomenology on hedonic phe-
nomenology. Here, again, dependence is not equal to reduction.
Emotions' hedonic tone is a necessary element for emotional phenomen-
ology but it is not individually nor jointly (together with the cognitive
6Though emotions cannot provide themselves with their particular object, and have to parasite other
mental states for that purpose, emotions make an original contribution to the intentionality of a sub-
ject's consciousness: they represent the particular object under the guise of their formal object.
Emotions parasite their cognitive bases to acquire their particular intentional object towards which
they react, representing it according to their formal intentional object: as dangerous, in the case of
fear; as a personal loss in the case of sadness; as goal-congruent in the case of joy; etc. Thus emotions
are representational states whose whole content is not exhausted by their cognitive bases' content. In
Deonna and Teroni's theory (2012), for instance, the emotion makes its intentional contribution by
means of representing its particular object in a certain way, through a certain felt somatic proﬁle
which is constitutive of the emotion. Thus, for instance, joy represents-as-goal-congruent that I
publish a paper by means of its felt somatic proﬁle: felt accelerated heart rate, several felt Musculo-
skeletal changes, etc.
7Surprise is a puzzling case. It is an exception to this rule because it is said to lack a clear valence. You can
be surprised by what later can be assessed as a negative or as a positive stimuli.
INQUIRY
19

bases) suﬃcient for it (more on this in a minute). We will also ﬁnd an
element among Kriegel's taxonomy suitable for reducing this aspect of
emotion: algedonic phenomenology.
4.2. What happens inside your head while you see a ﬁction ﬁlm?
Consider the following case. You are sitting on your sofa watching Man-
chester by the Sea (2016), directed by Kenneth Lonergan. Watching the
ﬁlm, we enter into the world of Lee Chandler, a solitary and emotionless
man. Later in the ﬁlm we discover the reason for his solitude and apparent
lack of aﬀection: he committed a negligent act while intoxicated by drugs
and alcohol that made his house catch ﬁre. As a result, his children died
and his wife divorced him. Due to the fact that Lee's act was accidental, no
charge is presented. During the ﬁlm Lee is haunted by guilt, unable to
overcome it.
Let's make a plausible inventory of our stream of consciousness during
the projection of the ﬁlm. We have perceptual phenomenology, the one
corresponding to the visual and auditory character of the ﬁlm. At the
same time, we interpret or directly perceive, depending on our position
regarding the contents of visual experience (see Siegel 2012), events as
happening. Those events are the plot of the ﬁlm and are not really hap-
pening. Instead, there are other events that really happen, the recorded
activity of the actors embedded in a ﬁlmmaking process, by means of
which the plot is represented. Thus, the plot materialized in the images
and audio of the ﬁlm produces the responses of the watcher, among
them, emotional responses.
The representation of the ﬁctional events that constitute the plot can be
consideredthecognitive basesofthe emotions produced by theﬁlm(Teroni
2019). Note, as emphatically pointed out by Deonna and Teroni (2012), that
emotions necessarily have cognitive bases. The particular object (e.g. a pred-
ator) of the emotion (e.g. fear) is provided to the emoter by its cognitive
bases (perception, imagination, memory, etc.) and upon that particular
object, the formal object of the emotion supervenes (following with the
example, danger). Summing up, we have perceptual phenomenal proper-
ties, the images and audio of the ﬁlm, and the imagination/comprehension
of the propositional contents that constitute the plot itself, represented by
those images and audio, and the emotional responses of the audience to
those contents in their cinematic presentation.
The question now is: can Kriegel's basic phenomenal elements make
sense of our stream of consciousness during the projection of the ﬁlm?
20
A. ÁLVAREZ-GONZÁLEZ

I think they cannot. In the following and last sub-section I am going to
argue that some of Kriegel elements are necessary for emotions in
virtue of being their cognitive bases or what gives them their hedonic
tone. However, none of them is individually nor jointly suﬃcient for
emotional phenomenology.
4.3. Isolating primitive emotional phenomenology in the 'lab' of
ﬁction
The question is then: can Kriegel's basic phenomenal elements make
sense of our stream of consciousness during the projection of the ﬁlm?
Obviously, the ﬁlm has a sensorial character, its images and audio.
Thus, the images and the audio, which produce a perceptual phenomen-
ological episode in the audience, are taken as perceptual props by means
of which the audience can entertain the propositional contents of the
ﬁction. The idea is just that the audience acquires the propositional con-
tents of the ﬁction (Kriegel's entertaining imaginings) relying on the per-
ceptual
character
of
the
medium
(Kriegel's
perception).
Clearly,
perceptual phenomenology is necessary to account for our watcher's
experience, but not suﬃcient.
The phenomenology of the watcher can neither reduce to the pleasure
or the pain (normally, psychological), together with perception as a cog-
nitive base, provided by the ﬁlm. Algedonic phenomenology seems to be
directed inwards (pain and pleasure are phenomenal phenomena located
in the self), while our engagement with the ﬁlm seems to be outwardly
directed (it is about things 'happening' in a ﬁctional world to ﬁctional
characters). Besides, algedonic phenomenology is too thin, good/bad,
in comparison with the thicker character of emotional phenomenology:
fearsome, shameful, etc.
Someone may ask: is not the experience of the ﬁlm, including its
emotional aspects, reducible to a combination of perception (cognitive
base) + imagination of the ﬁctional contents (cognitive base) + the belief
that Lee's fate is terrible, sad, etc. (cognitive base) + the algedonic phenom-
enology directed at those contents (hedonic tone)? That is, is it not possible
that, for instance, our sadness towards Lee's fate is factorizable into seeing
and interpreting Casey Aﬄeck's action as Lee's ones (perceptual phenomen-
ology), registering the propositional contents conveyed by those images
and audio (entertaining phenomenology), believing that those contents
instantiate some negative property (sadness, personal loss, etc.) and feel
bad about it (algedonic phenomenology)?
INQUIRY
21

This factorization of emotional experiences of ﬁctional movies may
seem plausible at ﬁrst sight, but soon we enter into complications.
Recall that, there is a key evaluative judgement according to which
Lee's fate is sad, or, according to which, Lee has suﬀered a great loss,
etc. Now, one natural question is: what is the evaluative content of this
judgement? That is, what is the meaning of the axiological concepts of
SAD or PERSONAL LOSS? And why is that content tied to negative alge-
donic experiences? It seems that the most plausible answer is: the
meaning of those terms is constituted by the ability to experience
certain emotions. Indeed, there is a philosophical view about the
meaning of evaluative discourse that enjoys very good theoretical
health: Neo-sentimentalism.
Neo-sentimentalism (D'Arms and Jacobson 2005; McDowell 1985;
Wiggins 1987) is the view that our appropriate deployment of evaluative
concepts entails the recognition that the object of which we predicate the
evaluative concept merits certain emotional reactions. Thus, if I predicate
the evaluative concept PERSONAL LOSS of a certain object, that entails
recognizing sadness about that object as a ﬁtting response. If neo-senti-
mentalism is true, then, unless we have emotions as an independent
source of axiological meaning, then we cannot appeal to evaluative jud-
gements in the reduction, since they are constituted by axiological con-
cepts which in turn are constituted by emotions. One of the elements
required for the reduction would entail emotional phenomenology, ren-
dering the reduction circular.8
From this, it follows that emotional phenomenology, as one of the
primary sources of axiological information, must be independent of eva-
luative judgements. That means that algedonic phenomenology plus the
emotion's cognitive bases, though individually necessary, are not jointly
suﬃcient for emotional phenomenology. A way out of this diﬃculty for
reductivism may be to reject neo-sentimentalism. However, that move
would be costly and would place the burden of proof in reductivism:
they would owe us an explanation of the meaning of axiological terms.
It seems that Kriegel's last recourse in order to reduce emotional phe-
nomenology to a combination of the elements of his inventory would be
that emotional phenomenology is reducible to emotions' possible cogni-
tive
bases + algedonic
phenomenology + conative
phenomenology.
8Several authors have also pointed out at the essential relation between emotional phenomenology and
the meaning of our evaluative concepts. According to them, without emotional phenomenology our
evaluative concepts would be emptied of meaning. See, for instance, Dewalque (2017) and Motague
(2017). I am indebted to an anonymous referee of this journal for this point.
22
A. ÁLVAREZ-GONZÁLEZ

Would conative phenomenology, together with possible emotion's cog-
nitive bases + algedonic phenomenology, be suﬃcient for emotional
phenomenology?
Remember that, for Kriegel, the paradigmatic conative phenomenol-
ogy was characterized by deciding-and-then-trying phenomenology.
However, he also accepts in a general sense that conative phenomenol-
ogy is characterized by value-committed attitudes, like presenting-as-
good/bad their contents. Good or bad in a sense essentially tied to
action, so that other things being equal if I can bring about something
presented-as-good to me by my conative phenomenology, then I
would do it. The question is: can we explain the watcher's experience
by appealing to conative phenomenology thus characterized? I do not
think so.
Conative phenomenology is neither necessary nor suﬃcient for
emotional phenomenology. Nor is it jointly, with Kriegel's other elements,
necessary nor suﬃcient for explaining our watcher's stream of conscious-
ness. As we said in section 2, ﬁction-elicited emotions are a kind of con-
templative emotion. Now it seems that every time you have a
contemplative emotion, that emotion lacks any link to action. This,
indeed, seems to be the case in our emotions elicited by ﬁction. Thus,
every time you have a contemplative emotion, you lack any link to
action, which is an essential condition for conative phenomenology. In
other words, contemplative emotional phenomenology cannot be co-
instantiated with conative phenomenology, because the former implies
the absence of an essential condition for the latter. That is, the instantia-
tion of contemplative emotional phenomenology entails the absence of
conative phenomenology, and the instantiation of conative phenomenol-
ogy entails the absence of contemplative emotional phenomenology.
Thus, our contemplative emotions elicited by ﬁction cannot be
accounted for by conative phenomenology, plus Kriegel's other elements,
because conative phenomenology necessarily would not be present in
those cases. Thus, given that we necessarily have contemplative
emotional phenomenology without conative phenomenology, we can
say that conative phenomenology is not necessary for emotional phe-
nomenology. Now, given that conative phenomenology is necessarily
not present in the cases under discussion, then we cannot add it to the
other necessary elements (the phenomenology of the possible cognitive
bases of the emotion + algedonic phenomenology) to have a combi-
nation that is jointly necessary and suﬃcient for the emotional phenom-
enology of the spectator of Manchester-by-the-Sea. But, if there is at least
INQUIRY
23

an emotional case for which (a relevant combination of) Kriegel's
elements are neither individually nor jointly suﬃcient for its emotional
phenomenology, then emotional phenomenology in general is not redu-
cible to them.
It seems then that we have exhausted Kriegel's elements without being
able to reduce emotional phenomenology. What we have found is that
some of Kriegel's elements are jointly and individually necessary for
emotion: a disjunction of all the possible mental states that can play
the role of the cognitive base of an emotion (perceptions or beliefs or ima-
ginings), and algedonic phenomenology, which provides the hedonic
tone of the emotion. However, no combination of Kriegel's elements is
suﬃcient for emotional phenomenology. From this it follows that Krie-
gel's elements cannot reduce emotional phenomenology and, hence,
that emotional phenomenology is sui generis, that is, that emotional phe-
nomenology is primitive.
5. Primitive emotional phenomenology and theories of emotion9
Besides the debate about the irreducibility of emotional phenomenology,
it exists a debate in the philosophical nature of emotion in which diﬀerent
theories try to explain emotions, assimilating them to, or making analo-
gies with, more well-understood mental phenomena, like perception,
belief, motivation, bodily feelings, desires, etc. Examples abound. Addres-
sing all the diﬀerent theories of emotion is beyond the scope of this
paper. I will assess my results vis-à-vis four competing and renown the-
ories of emotion: the attitudinal theory of emotion, the perceptual
theory of emotion, the judgemental theory of emotion and the motiva-
tional theory of emotion. My purpose is to show the relation between
my results and ongoing debates about the nature of emotion.
One's conditional to perform modus ponens is another's same con-
ditional to perform modus tollens. In my argument, I have started from
what I arguably took as intuitive premises, based on our phenomenology
of ﬁction consumption. Reasoning from them and some other principles
and theories, like neo-sentimentalism, I have derived the thesis that
emotional phenomenology is primitive. Now, from my considerations it
follows that certain theories of emotion are plausibly true (e.g. the attitu-
dinal theory of emotion) whereas other theories of emotion are ruled out
(e.g. the judgemental theory of emotion). Those who have independent
9I owe the suggestion for this section to a reviewer from this journal.
24
A. ÁLVAREZ-GONZÁLEZ

reasons to reject my conclusions, namely, that certain theories of emotion
are not the case, would deny the antecedent analysis that leads to that
conclusion or, at least, would have more resistance to embrace it. So,
for instance, someone who embraces the judgemental theory of
emotion for independent reasons would ﬁnd resistance to accept my pre-
mises maybe to the point of even rejecting them.
This means that my premises can be resisted and, though they are
intuitive and supported by reasons (as I have showed in the previous sec-
tions), they are not universal. My argument is then conditional: for those
who ﬁnd these premises and the reasons for them plausible, this is what it
follows. However, even for those who reject the premises, the argument is
still interesting, since it shows what reasons we have for those premises
and what theories of emotion follow from that way of understanding
emotional phenomenology in ﬁctional contexts.
In this last section, I will examine the abovementioned theories of
emotion vis-à-vis the consequences of my argument for primitive
emotional phenomenology.
Let's start with the attitudinal theory of emotion (see, for instance,
Deonna and Teroni 2012). According to Deonna and Teroni emotions
are bodily attitudes whose formal objects are the core relational
themes of the given emotion (e.g. danger for fear, goal congruence for
joy, etc.). In principle, this bodily attitude can be objectual (e.g. fear of a
predator) or propositional (e.g. fear about the fact that the predator
may eat me alive). For instance, fear is a speciﬁc bodily attitude
through which dangerousness is represented.10 An emotion is ﬁtting
when and only when its particular object instantiates its formal object.
For instance, fear about a dangerous (formal object) predator (particular
object) is ﬁtting. It seems that the attitudinal theory of emotion is compa-
tible with my results, according to which emotional phenomenology is
primitive, since the type of attitude emotions are may be sui generis or
non-reducible to more familiar ones.
What about the perceptual theory of emotion (see, for instance, Tappo-
let 2016). According to this theory emotions are sui generis perceptions of
value. Given that this type of perception is sui generis and non-dependent
10Emotions have complex intentionality. They parasite their cognitive bases to acquire their particular
intentional object towards which they react, representing it according to their formal intentional
object: as dangerous, in the case of fear; as a personal loss in the case of sadness; as goal-congruent
in the case of joy; etc. According to my interpretation of Deonna and Teroni's theory, the emotions
represent their particular object under the guise of their formal object by means of their characteristic
felt bodily proﬁle. Thus, emotions are representational states whose whole content is not exhausted by
their cognitive bases' content.
INQUIRY
25

on cognitive (and according to Tappolet neither on conative) elements,
the theory is compatible with the result that emotional phenomenology
is primitive.
What happen with the judgemental theory of emotion (see, for instance,
Nussbaum 2003)? According to this theory emotions are axiological judge-
ments. The judgemental theory of emotion would be ruled out because
emotions would necessarily involve some cognitive elements, namely, jud-
gements, and those cognitive elements would also be suﬃcient for them.
Finally, let's examine how the motivational theory of emotion (see, for
instance, Scarantino 2014) clashes with my results. This theory would
also be ruled out by my results because emotions would necessarily
involve conative elements, and this is incompatible with the idea of con-
templative emotions.
6. Conclusion
We have isolated primitive emotional phenomenology in the 'lab' of
ﬁction. In that 'clean' environment we studied contemplative emotions
and their phenomenology, devoid of conative impurities. We see that
this primitive element, irreducible to other types of phenomenology
plays an essential role in explaining our ordinary practices with ﬁction.
Without primitive emotional phenomenology we cannot fully explain
our stream of consciousness. The task ahead is articulating an irreducible
analysis of it. This argument joins those already existent in the literature
(by Dewalque and by Mitchell) and combines its force with them in claim-
ing primitive status for emotional phenomenology.
Acknowledgements
I want to thank ﬁrst my advisors: Esa Díaz León and Manuel García-Carpintero. In
addition, I want to thank especially F. Contesi, M. Gömori, A. Rivadulla and
M. Kortabarria and general audiences at Logos Student Seminar at Barcelona for their
insightful comments on previous versions of this paper. I want to thank audiences at
the University of Santiago de Compostela, specially X. De Donato and C. Martínez. I
also want to thank Brody Loeﬄer for his valuable stylistic and grammatical corrections
and philosophical insights. Finally, I want to thank Beatriz Piñeiro Salgado for her
unconditional support while writing this paper and, also, for her clever comments.
Disclosure statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the author(s).
26
A. ÁLVAREZ-GONZÁLEZ

Funding
FPU GRANT (Ministerio Español de Educación y Formación Profesional)/Grant Number:
FPU18/01134.
ORCID
Aarón Álvarez-González
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6541-3784
References
Brentano, Franz. (1874) 1973. Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint. Translated
by A. Rancurello, D. B. Terrell, and L.L. McAllister. London: Routledge and
Kegan Paul.
Currie, Gregory. 1989. The Nature of Fiction. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
D'Arms, J., and D. Jacobson. 2005. "Two Arguments for Sentimentalism." Philosophical
Issues 15 (1): 1-12. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1533-6077.2005.00050.x.
Deonna, J., and F. Teroni. 2012. The Emotions: A Philosophical Introduction. New York:
Routledge.
Dewalque, A. 2017. "Emotional Phenomenology: Towards a Nonreductive Analysis."
Midwest Studies in Philosophy 41 (1): 27-40. https://doi.org/10.1111/misp.12067.
Fine, K. 2012. "Guide to Ground." In Metaphysical Grounding: Understanding the
Structure of Reality, edited by F. Correia, and B. Schnieder, 37-80. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Hilgers, Thomas. 2017. Aesthetic Disinterestedness: Art, Experience and the Self.
New York: Routledge.
James, W. 1884. "What is an Emotion?" Mind; A Quarterly Review of Psychology and
Philosophy 9 (34): 188-205. https://doi.org/10.1093/mind/os-IX.34.188.
Kriegel, Uriah. 2015. The Varieties of Consciousness. New York: Oxford University Press.
Kriegel, U. 2017. "Brentano's Classiﬁcation of Mental Phenomena." In The Routledge
Handbook of Franz Brentano and the Brentano School, edited by U. Kriegel 97-103.
New York: Routledge.
Matravers, Derek. 2014. Fiction and Narrative. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
McDowell, J. 1985. "Values and Secondary Qualities." In Ethical Theory, edited by J.
Rachels, 210-226. New York: Oxford University Press.
Mitchell, J. 2020. "The Irreducibility of Emotional Phenomenology." Erkenntnis 85 (5):
1241-1268. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10670-018-0075-8.
Montague, M. 2009. "The Logic, Intentionality, and Phenomenology of Emotion."
Philosophical Studies 145 (2): 171-192. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11098-008-9218-0.
Motague, M. 2017. "A Contemporary View of Breantano's Theory of Emotion." The
Monist 100 (1): 64-68. https://doi.org/10.1093/monist/onw019.
Nussbaum, Martha. 2003. Upheavals of Thought: The Intelligence of Emotion.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Pautz, A. 2013. "Does Phenomenology Ground Mental Content?" In Phenomenal
Intentionality, edited by U. Kriegel, 1-26. New York: Oxford University Press.
INQUIRY
27

Pitt, D. 2004. "The Phenomenology of Cognition; or What Is Like to Think That P."
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 69 (1): 1-36. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.
1933-1592.2004.tb00382.x.
Prinz, Jesse. 2004. Gut Reactions. A Perceptual Theory of Emotion. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Prinz, J. 2011. "Conscious Thought." In Cognitive Phenomenology, edited by T. Bayne,
and M. Montague 174-197. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Radford, C. 1975. "How Can We Be Moved by the Fate of Anna Karenina?" Proceedings
of the Aristotelian Society, Supplemental 49 (1): 67-80. https://doi.org/10.1093/
aristoteliansupp/49.1.67.
Scarantino, A. 2014. "The Motivational Theory of Emotions." In Moral Psychology and
Human Agency, edited by D. Jacobson, and J. D'Arms, 156-185. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Schaﬀer, J. 2009. "On What Grounds What." In Metametaphysics: New Essays on the
Foundation of Ontology, edited by D. Manley, D. J. Chalmers, and R. Wasserman
347-384. New York: Oxford University Press.
Siegel, Susanna. 2012. The Contents of Visual Experience. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Smith, Michael. 1994. The Moral Problem. Oxford: Blackwell.
Solomon, Robert. 1976. The Passions. New York: Doubleday.
Stecker, R. 2011. "Should We Still Care About the Paradox of Fiction?" British Journal of
Aesthetics 51 (3): 295-308. https://doi.org/10.1093/aesthj/ayr019.
Tappolet, Christine. 2016. Emotions, Values and Agency. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Teroni, F. 2019. "Emotion, Fiction and Rationality." British Journal of Aesthetics 59 (2):
113-128. https://doi.org/10.1093/aesthj/ayz015.
Walton, K. 1978. "Fearing Fictions." Journal of Philosophy 75 (1): 5-27. https://doi.org/
10.2307/2025831.
Walton, Kendall. 1993. Mimesis as Make-Believe. Harvard: Harvard University Press.
Wiggins, David. 1987. A Sensible Subjectivism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
28
A. ÁLVAREZ-GONZÁLEZ

