Physiotherapy Theory and Practice
An International Journal of Physiotherapy
ISSN: 0959-3985 (Print) 1532-5040 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/iptp20
Embodied-enactive clinical reasoning in physical
therapy
Gunn Kristin Øberg, Britt Normann & Shaun Gallagher
To cite this article: Gunn Kristin Øberg, Britt Normann & Shaun Gallagher (2015) Embodied-
enactive clinical reasoning in physical therapy, Physiotherapy Theory and Practice, 31:4,
244-252, DOI: 10.3109/09593985.2014.1002873
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.3109/09593985.2014.1002873
Published online: 14 Jan 2015.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 2636
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 24 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=iptp20

http://informahealthcare.com/ptp
ISSN: 0959-3985 (print), 1532-5040 (electronic)
Physiother Theory Pract, 2015; 31(4): 244-252
! 2015 Informa Healthcare USA, Inc. DOI: 10.3109/09593985.2014.1002873
PROFESSIONAL THEORETICAL ARTICLE
Embodied-enactive clinical reasoning in physical therapy
Gunn Kristin Øberg, PhD, PT1,2*, Britt Normann, PhD, PT1,3*, and Shaun Gallagher, PhD4,5,6
1Department of Health and Care Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences, UiT The Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway, 2University Hospital
North Norway HF, Tromsø, Norway, 3Nordland Hospital Trust, Bodø, Norway, 4Department of Philosophy, University of Memphis, Memphis, TN,
USA, 5School of Humanities, University of Hertfordshire, UK, and 6Faculty of Law, Humanities and the Arts, University of Wollongong, Wollongong,
Australia
Abstract
Clinical reasoning is essential in physical therapy practice. Instrumental approaches and more
recent narrative approaches to clinical reasoning guide physical therapists in their under-
standing of the patient's movement disturbances and help them to plan strategies to improve
function. To the extent that instrumental and/or narrative models of clinical reasoning
represent impairments as mere physical disturbances, we argue that such models remain
incomplete. We draw on a phenomenologically inspired approach to embodied cognition
(termed ''enactivism'') to suggest that the dynamics of lived bodily engagement between
physical therapist and patient contribute to and help to constitute the clinical reasoning
process. This article outlines the phenomenologically informed enactive perspective on clinical
reasoning, with special reference to clinical work that addresses impairments as sequelae of
neurological diseases.
Keywords
Clinical reasoning, embodiment, enactive
intersubjectivity, physical therapy
History
Received 23 March 2014
Revised 30 September 2014
Accepted 30 September 2014
Published online 14 January 2015
Introduction
Clinical reasoning (CR) refers to professional judgments made
before, during and after clinical sessions in physical therapy
(Edwards et al, 2004; Higgs, 2008). Reflective decision making is
a core element in clinical reasoning; it supports professional
autonomy and is vital for continued professional development
(Dowds and French, 2008; French and Dowds, 2008; Higgs and
Titchen, 2001; Jensen, Gwyer, Shepard, and Hack, 2000;
Wainwright, Shepard, Harman, and Stephens, 2010). Models
and strategies of CR described in the literature aim to guide
the physical therapist (PT) in the decision making process
(Bartlett and Palisano, 2002; Edwards et al, 2004; Kenyon, 2013).
A fundamental focus in physical therapy and CR is on the body
and movement (World Confederation of Physical Therapy, 2013)
and this requires a full conceptualization of the body to develop
an adequate model of CR in physical therapy (Gibson, Nixon, and
Nicholls, 2010; Nicholls and Gibson, 2010; Wikstro¨m-Grotell and
Eriksson, 2012). Recent phenomenological approaches challenge
more established ways of understanding the body (i.e. the body as
the biological organism or biomechanical system). In this paper,
we highlight the implicit philosophical conception of the body
that operates in the current CR literature and we argue for an
alternative understanding based on phenomenology of the body,
which leads to an enhanced model of embodied and enactive
clinical reasoning. We relate this model to the neurological field
since interaction with people with neurological impairments
easily demonstrates its relevance to CR more generally. The
model, however, is also relevant across physical therapy, both
regarding assessment and treatment in all patients having sensory-
motor and/or perceptual disturbances.
Two concepts of the body
The implicit theoretical conception of the body that operates in
medical and physical therapies is rooted in a traditional Cartesian
materialism where body is understood purely as physical mech-
anism (Dennett, 1991). On this view, the body is regarded as a
biomechanical system, while the mind or consciousness is treated
as a subjective epiphenomenal product (i.e. a by-product without
causal power) of brain states (Gallagher, 2012). From this
medicalized and mechanical view, knowledge of the body is
reducible to a collection of third-person objective facts.
The phenomenological understanding of the body begins with
the work of the philosopher Edmund Husserl. Phenomenology
(Table 1 - provides operational definitions of terms and concepts
related to the embodied-enactive reasoning process) makes an
important distinction, developed by Husserl (2012) and Merleau-
Ponty (1962), between the objective body (Ko¨rper, or body-
as-object) and the lived body (Leib, or body-as-subject). On one
hand, one perceives one's body and can view it in an objective
manner (the body-as-object) and, on the other hand, the perceiver
(the subject, the agent) is the body and, therefore, perceives,
experiences, and acts in an embodied way (body-as-subject).
Consequently, this approach points to the ambiguity of the body;
one both has a body and is a body simultaneously (Merleau-Ponty,
1962). The phenomenology of the body focuses on the body-
as-subject, the perceiving body that experiences the world. In this
regard, intentionality, understood as directedness towards an
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
Address correspondence to Gunn Kristin Øberg, PhD, PT, Department of
Health and Care Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences, UiT The Arctic
University of Norway, MH-Building, 9037 Tromsø, Norway. E-mail:
gunn.kristin.oeberg@uit.no

object, is not only an essential aspect of consciousness but also
an intrinsic aspect of
lived bodily movement and action
(Gallagher, 2012).
Current clinical reasoning (CR) models
Strategies for CR imply a particular focus on thinking, decision
making, and action within clinical practice (Edwards et al, 2004).
In the hypothetic-deductive model for CR, clinicians focus on
information from and about the patient, and pay attention to signs
and symptoms to form a tentative hypothesis regarding diagnosis
(Edwards et al, 2004; Higgs and Jones, 2008). This diagnostic
reasoning process, which in physical therapy, includes evaluation
and re-evaluation of how different body parts interact in posture
and during movement, leads to hypotheses of how underlying
impairments impact the patient's movement problem (Bartlett and
Palisano, 2002; Normann, 2013; Shumway-Cook and Woollacott,
2012; Stokes, 2004). Another diagnostic reasoning model, based
on ''pattern recognition'', highlights the clinicians' reservoir of
knowledge as the source for a seemingly intuitive, almost
immediate recognition of certain features of the case (Edwards
et al, 2004; Higgs and Jones, 2008). These strategies reflect
different conceptions of knowledge. The former is rooted in the
positivist paradigm (Bunniss and Kelly, 2010) where only
objective and measurable knowledge is valid. The latter appre-
ciates the personal and often tacit aspects of experienced-based
knowledge (Higgs and Titchen, 2001). Both models find support
in cognitive sciences (Higgs and Jones, 2008). Both involve
cognitive reasoning strategies in which the patient's voice (i.e.
reflections and utterances about her or his own problems) tends to
be less prominent than the mental processes that operate in the
therapist's mind. Moreover, both models inherit the theoretical
conception of the body found in the functionalist models of
classic cognitive sciences, the body-as-object, reflecting a trad-
itional Cartesian materialism.
Physical therapists, like all healthcare professionals and
scientists, find it vitally important to take a third-person
perspective of the body. Understanding anatomy, neuromuscular,
and brain function, for example, is essential. Observing the
patient's body in different postures and activities, gathering
evidence, forming hypotheses and strategies, and being proficient
in pattern recognition are all important elements of the PT's
practice. However, many authors (Edwards and Richardson, 2007;
Edwards et al, 2004; Jensen, Gwyer, Shepard, and Hack, 2000;
Mattingly, 1991; Thornquist, 2006) agree that a third person
approach to clinical reasoning is insufficient because physical
therapists who use this approach alone ignore other important
aspects of the body and gives the only active part in the CR
process to the PT.
As an alternative to such diagnostic reasoning models, some
authors (Higgs, 2008; Jensen, Gwyer, Shepard, and Hack, 2000;
Normann, Sørgaard, Salvesen, and Moe, 2014; Palisano, 2010)
accentuate the importance of practical reasoning, emphasizing the
active, interactive and often tacit aspects of practice, and
knowledge development in the clinical setting. These authors
often refer to Scho¨n (1991) and his concept reflection-in-action
which implies the awareness, reflection, and development of
knowledge through action. In line with the complexity of clinical
settings, Edwards et al (2004) have identified several CR
strategies: interactive, procedural, pedagogical, collaborative,
predictive, and ethical. They argue that these strategies are
''dialectical'' or integrated and not separate reasoning strategies
for different clinical questions as previously suggested (Edwards,
Braunack-Mayer, and Jones, 2005). Furthermore, they propose
that these strategies are integrated across two general reasoning
processes: diagnostic (as described above) and narrative reasoning
(Edwards et al, 2004). The latter involves understanding the
patient's illness and/or disability experiences, their story, context,
beliefs, and culture (Edwards et al, 2004; Jones, Jensen, and
Edwards, 2008). These two processes derive from fundamentally
different paradigms, but are integrated in a dialectical relation-
ship. Specifically, Edwards et al (2004) add to third-person
instrumental reasoning a second-person communicative or narra-
tive reasoning, derived from an interpretive, hermeneutical
paradigm. By taking a second-person perspective one understands
the other's experience. Edwards et al (2004) importantly accen-
tuate verbal and gestural communication in the clinical setting,
allowing the patient to describe his first-person experiences (i.e.
his/her own lived experience). Yet, not unlike instrumental
reasoning, communicative, or narrative reasoning remains prop-
ositional (i.e. in a broad sense described in terms of understanding
the expressed [or unexpressed] beliefs or assumptions held by the
patient, for example). CR is thereby characterized primarily as a
set of mental and linguistic (narrative) events traded between the
PT and the patient. Although such communicative exchange (e.g.
people gain information and deepen their understanding to
support collaborative decision making) is a truly important part
of the process, what the PT and the patient co-construct as bodies
in the particular situation does not appear to be a theme within
this model. For the most part, the body comes into the picture
Table 1. Definitions.
Body-as-object: The body as it is perceived or observed from a third-person or objective perspective, as in medical examination.
Body-as-subject: The body as perceiver or agent, as it is experienced from a first-person perspective.
Embodied cognition: A theory or approach in cognitive science that emphasizes the role of embodiment (i.e. a wide range of bodily processes, including
sensory-motor and affective processes) in cognition.
Enaction: A dynamic process (or coupling) between a cognitive organism/agent and its environment. The agent actively participates in the generation of
meaning through entering an active embodied engagement with the environment or process of interaction with other people.
Intentionality: Being directed toward something or someone; consciousness is always about or of something. Phenomenology regards intentionality as
the central structure of an experience (Gallagher, 2012; Shaw and Connelly, 2012). This same intentionality carries over to action and intrinsically
structures the movement involved in action so that different intentions are reflected in different kinematic patterns.
Minimal self: An immediate (pre-reflective) consciousness of oneself as the subject of experience or the agent of one's action based on embodied
processes such as proprioception.
Narrative self: A reflective conception of self that is based on accounts (or stories) that we or others are able to tell about ourselves.
Participatory sense making: When two (or more) people engage in interactions that produce meaning that could not be produced by either individual
alone.
Phenomenology: The study of cognition/consciousness as experienced from the first-person point of view (see Gallagher, 2012).
Pre-reflective experience: The way a subject or agent experiences things (including one's body) without (or prior to) thinking or reflecting about it.
DOI: 10.3109/09593985.2014.1002873
Embodied-enactive clinical reasoning
245

only instrumentally, as Edwards et al (2004) note about the
procedural use of movement as ''almost always. . . a highly
instrumental procedure''.
Greenfield and Jensen (2010), like Mattingly (1991), introduce
a phenomenological approach that is strongly focused on the
patient's own descriptions or narratives regarding his/her lived
experiences. This approach, like the one proposed by Edwards et al
(2004), enhances the patient's voice, the first-person perspective
and the intersubjective, second-person perspective, in physical
therapy, and as conceived by Greenfield and Jensen (2010), is
particularly related to ethical reasoning. These phenomenologic-
ally inspired views of CR make reference to some of Husserl's
works where the conception of the body is less prominent than in
others, that is, they refer to works where Husserl focuses primarily
on consciousness and the first-person point of view (i.e. the
way things appear in conscious experience) (Greenfield and
Jensen, 2010; Mattingly, 1991). Within these phenomenological
approaches, as in the dialectical model, the importance of the co-
construction of meaning by the PT and patient is rightly highlighted
as an ongoing interactive process (Edwards, Braunack-Mayer, and
Jones, 2005; Edwards et al, 2004; Greenfield and Jensen, 2010;
Jensen, Gwyer, Shepard, and Hack, 2000). Within this process,
however, the body's role is not thematized except regarding its
biological and biomechanical functions.
Accordingly, even in these phenomenological approaches, the
body appears only as an object of concern, an intentional object that
is part of the narrative, an entity about which one communicates.
The body, however, should not be regarded only as a biological
organism or biomechanical system, the way it is described in the
bio-psycho-social model of health and illness and the framework of
the International Classification of Function (ICF) (World Health
Organization, 2001). Understanding the body merely as a bio-
logical organism can lead very easily to the view that the body is
just an ''object'' of manipulation (i.e. the ''thing'' that needs to be
''fixed'' either by the PT or in collaboration/discussion between
the PT and the patient/family, or by manipulating environmental
factors). Rather, understanding the body as a lived body, or body-
as-subject, is required (Nicholls and Gibson, 2010, 2012) and this
suggests a different role for the body within the process of CR, one
that has so far been sparsely investigated.
The embodied-enactive model we propose takes CR to be an
ongoing intersubjective process between embodied agents. In
more precise terms, we will argue that the body-as-subject should
be understood to be an agentive body, enactively engaged in the
environment. Furthermore, this applies to both the PT's and the
patient's body - they are both bodily agents, and in this respect,
the patient is literally taken to be involved in his/her own therapy
as a bodily agent. Reasoning in the clinical setting, accordingly, is
conceived in part as an intersubjective bodily practice, and not
just a dialectic of instrumental and narrative practices, although
the importance of these practices is not denied.
Embodiment and physical therapy
The recognition of the ambiguity of the body suggests that for a
full understanding of embodiment PTs need to conceive the body
as the center of experience and expression, and simultaneously as
a physical organism that can be described in biological terms
(Merleau-Ponty, 1962). In addition to a third-person perspective
on the body, the PT, as part of CR, needs to make use of a first-
person perspective of her own body and a second-person
perspective formed in an embodied interaction with the patient.
On this view, both the PT and the patient express themselves and
communicate as embodied subjects. Hence, communication is not
only the words and gestures but also includes physical interaction,
and this includes the PT's handling and the patient's responses.
On this embodied-enactive model, intentionality (Table 1) is
embodied. Intentionality is a ''motor intentionality'' constituted
through sensory-motor processes (Merleau-Ponty, 1962) and thus
not reducible to the intentionality of consciousness (Gallagher,
2012; Husserl, 2012). Sensory processes, perception, and move-
ment are often disturbed aspects in people with neurological
diseases hence their embodied intentionality may be changed.
Merleau-Ponty (1962) showed that phenomenology can be
integrated
with
empirical
(neurological
and
psychological)
research methods, and this connection has been developed in
more recent embodied approaches to cognitive science (Gallagher,
2005; Varela, Thompson, and Rosch, 1991). For our understanding
of CR, and for CR practice itself, several phenomenological
distinctions clarified in this literature are useful. Specifically, the
concepts of body schema, body image, sense of ownership, and
sense of agency (Gallagher, 2005) help in the differentiation/
interpretation/understanding of signs and symptoms, bodily
expressions and verbal communication, and thereby support
intervention.
Body schema and body image
The concepts of body schema and body image have often been
confused in their long history of use across multiple disciplines
(Brodal, 2004; De Vignemont, 2010; Gallagher, 2005; Shumway-
Cook and Woollacott, 2007). They can be clearly distinguished,
however, and can contribute to a developed notion of embodi-
ment. Gallagher (2005) defines the body schema as a close-to-
automatic system of processes that constantly regulate posture and
movement to serve intentional action. It consists of a system of
sensory-motor capacities that function without awareness of the
body, or the necessity of perceptual monitoring. It includes motor-
control capacities, abilities, and habits that both enable and
constrain movement and the maintenance of posture. It continues
to operate, and in many cases, operates best, when the intentional
object of perception is something other than one's own body
(Gallagher, 2005; Gallagher and Cole, 1995). In this regard, the
body schema helps to constitute important aspects of the minimal
self (Table 1), which distinguished from the narrative self
(Gallagher,
2012)
involves
proprioceptive
and
kinaesthetic
aspects and is described as ''an integral part of conscious life
with an immediate experiential character'' (Gallagher, 2000,
2012).
Body-schematic control of movement sub-serves and is fully
integrated with the intentional experience or goal-directed
behavior of the subject. That is, although a body schema operates
in a close to automatic way, its operations are not a matter of mere
reflex (Gallagher, 2005; Maravita, Spence, and Driver, 2003).
Kinematic studies of intentional actions show that the precise
kinematics of movement involved in action vary according to the
agent's intention (Becchio et al, 2012; Shumway-Cook and
Woollacott, 2012). I may reach and grasp an apple differently, for
example, if I reach and grasp it in order to eat it, or to offer it to
someone, or to throw it (Becchio et al, 2012). Such kinematic
variations are entirely outside of my awareness, yet are in
complete conformity with my intention (Gallagher, 2005).
Aspects of these sensory motor systems often malfunction in
children and adults with neurological conditions (Campbell,
Palisano, and Vander Linden, 2012; Gallagher, 2001; Gallagher
and Vaever, 2004; Shumway-Cook and Woollacott, 2012). In
persons who suffer stroke, both the ascending and descending
tracts in the internal capsule are often affected causing both
sensory and motor impairments disturbing the person's body
schema, their intentional actions, and the way they experience
their bodies and their environments. Evaluation of such impair-
ments should enter into the PT's clinical decision-making process,
246
G. K. Øberg et al.
Physiother Theory Pract, 2015; 31(4): 244-252

and in such contexts, they should be considered as aspects of the
embodied self and not merely as impairments within the body as a
biological organism.
Body image, in contrast to body schema, consists of a system
of perceptions, attitudes, and beliefs pertaining to one's own
body; as such it contributes to a more extended (narrative)
conception of self (Gallagher, 2005). Body image thus involves
more than occurrent perceptions since it can include conceptual
beliefs and emotional attitudes where the object of such inten-
tional states is or concerns one's own body. The difference
between body image and body schema is similar to the difference
between a perception (or conscious monitoring) of one's bodily
movement and the actual accomplishment (including the subcon-
scious processing) of that movement, respectively (Gallagher,
2005). The various aspects of body image may also be disturbed
in children and adults who have dysfunction in their cognitive,
emotional, and perceptual networks (e.g. following stroke or in
cerebral palsy (CP)) (Hammar, Ozolins, Idvall, and Rudebeck,
2009; Keppel and Crowe, 2000).
Empirical support for the distinction between body schema and
body image relies on a double dissociation found in cases in
which a person has an intact body image but a dysfunctional body
schema, and vice versa. For example, in cases of unilateral neglect
following stroke, one can find evidence of an intact body schema
in the absence of a completely intact body image. Patients
suffering from neurologically caused defects in perception of the
left side of the body may be said to exclude that side from their
body image. Patients may fail to dress their left side or comb their
hair on the left side, yet not suffer motor weakness or deficits on
that side (Ogden, 2005; Pribram, 1999). In this regard, their body-
schematic systems are intact despite problems with body image
on the neglected side.
Dissociation of the opposite kind is described in rare cases of
deafferentation, where persons have lost tactile and proprioceptive
input below the neck, but still control their movements by
cognitive intervention and visual guidance of their limbs (Cole
and Cole, 1995). In such cases, they consciously employ their
visually based body image to compensate for the impairment of
their body schemas (Cole and Cole, 1995; Gallagher and Cole,
1995). This may also be the situation when the ascending systems
are partially compromised either in the peripheral or in the central
nervous system (e.g. in people with polyneuropathy, multiple
sclerosis (MS), CP, stroke). In these people, overuse of vision to
initiate and monitor movement is a common compensatory
strategy seen in clinical practice, and we consider this a deviation
towards body-image driven movement.
In clinical practice, patients often show a mix of disturbances
due to pathology as well as learned non-use (Taub, 2004) leading
to various degrees of deficits or alterations in both body schema
and body image. By distinguishing body schema and body image
in CR, it may help the PT to be more precise in the therapeutic
approach. To do so, however, the PT needs to interact with the
patient in ways that may involve both explicit and implicit, inter-
bodily communications and correspondences, in a domain that
Merleau-Ponty (1962) called ''intercorporeity''. The PT, with or
without using hands-on facilitation, may choose to enhance the
patient's conscious monitoring of her/his own movements (a body
image driven approach) (Normann, 2013). For example, the PT
may ask patients to recall how they reached out for a bottle prior
to the stroke, and to visualize that movement before or while
performing the activity. Visualization prior to action is known to
improve performance in athletic contexts and this technique has
recently been included in physiotherapy (Craje et al, 2010;
Ietswaart et al, 2011). Furthermore, while the patient performs
reach and grasp actions, the PT may ask the patient: ''can you feel
the movement in your arm?'' - thus, directing his/her attention
towards the kinematic aspects of her/his own body while moving.
We consider these approaches as body image driven and they may
usefully contribute to controlled production of movement. In most
everyday action, however, one does not need to monitor
movement, and to the extent that one does, it may impede skillful
action (Gallagher, 2005; Shumway-Cook and Woollacott, 2012).
Alternatively, the PT may choose to require more automatic
problem solving of movement necessary to accomplish some task
by asking the patient to focus on something other than their bodily
movement. This may be a toy when treating children or familiar
objects or instruments for adults. This could also be accomplished
simply by (re-) arranging the environment (including the PT's
own body, in some cases) or the tasks to elicit certain movements.
We consider these alternatives body-schematic driven approaches.
Another option is to more directly address body-schema problems
through active realignment of body parts. To optimize the sitting
position through activation of trunk and scapula stability, the
PT can use hands-on facilitation and/or equipment (activating
ascending systems and postural feed forward mechanisms) prior
to training reach and grasp. The PT may combine this approach
with specific tissue mobilization of the patient's hand (activation
the ascending systems) prior to introducing a toy/object to
reach for.
Sense of ownership and sense of agency
A second conceptual distinction about embodied aspects of
movement and action may be helpful in CR. This distinction,
between a sense of ownership (for the body, body part, or for the
action itself) and a sense of agency (for action), cuts across the
previous distinction between body image and body schema
(Gallagher, 2000). The sense of agency is the pre-reflective sense
that I am the initiator or source of the action. When I reach for a
cup, my sense is that I am the one who generates the action. My
sense of ownership is the pre-reflective sense that my body is the
one that is moving in the action. In the normal experience of
intentional action, the sense of agency and the sense of ownership
coincide and may be indistinguishable. Nonetheless, it is quite
possible to distinguish them in the case of involuntary action
(Gallagher, 2005). If, for example, someone is pushed from
behind, he can say that he is the one moving (the sense of
ownership for the initial movement), but that he is not the initiator
of the action (no sense of agency). If a PT passively manipulates a
patient's limb, the patient may experience ownership of the
movement (i.e. he has a sense that he is the one who is being
moved) but he does not have a sense of causing or controlling the
movement, that is, no sense of agency. The agent of the movement
is the PT who is manipulating the patient's limb. It may be a case
of shared agency, however, when the PT is facilitating the
movement through hands-on manipulation but also enabling the
patient to actively participate in controlling the movement. This
could, for example, be the case when the PT uses her hands to
facilitate dynamic standing balance that enables the patient to
reach for an object or to make a step. Agency, including shared
agency, reflects ''as an index of the capability and freedom to
exercise choice and opportunity for change'' as Edwards, Delany,
Townsend, and Swisher (2011) describe. Considerations regard-
ing enhancement of sense of agency should be considered in CR
since independence in daily living is one of the goals across the
fields of physical therapy (Shumway-Cook and Woollacott, 2012;
World Confederation of Physical Therapy, 2013). This enhance-
ment may begin in the clinical setting as something that is shared
between PT and patient in an intercorporeity established in
interaction.
As the sense of ownership has a strong afferent component and
depends on sensory integration processes (Tsakiris, Prabhu, and
DOI: 10.3109/09593985.2014.1002873
Embodied-enactive clinical reasoning
247

Haggard, 2006; Tsakiris et al, 2007) pathologies involving the
ascending systems and perceptual networks for integration of
these may disrupt this aspect of the embodied self. In other cases,
the sense of agency fails when the efferent components in motor
control are affected as in involuntary movements such as dystonia,
ataxia, or the described Anarchic Hand Syndrome (Gallagher and
Vaever, 2004; Haggard, 2005; Sala, 1998; Tsakiris and Haggard,
2005). Involuntary movements may be accompanied by a feeling
of foreignness and sometimes the personification of the affected
limb (Groom, Ng, Kevorkian, and Levy, 1999) and, therefore,
experienced as driven by an external agent (Tow and Chua, 1998).
Body schema, body image, sense of ownership, and sense of
agency operate in a non-conceptual and non-propositional way in
embodied movement. That is, they may have felt a quality that is
experienced pre-reflectively; as such, they primarily inform
movement rather than our thinking about movement. They can
also be brought to the level of reflective awareness and conceptual
thought. Reflectively or pre-reflectively, they can inform the CR
process with regard to what the patient expresses and experiences
as an embodied self in everyday life and in the clinical encounter.
The expressions of such experiences encompass words, gestures,
and bodily aspects that are pre-reflective for the patient but often
perceptible for the PT in such things as tone, posture, and habitual
movements. That is, the patent's posture and movement may
themselves communicate the patient's experience. Although
linguistic narratives provided by the patient may be helpful,
they are not necessarily sufficient to capture their full bodily
experience because we do not usually reflect and describe our
own movements. In addition to such linguistic narratives, non-
propositional, non-verbal ''embodied narratives'' (Menary, 2008),
expressions of the patient's lived body, from their first-person
perspective that are not easy or possible to communicate through
words, should be integrated into the CR process as part of what
the patient contributes to this process.
On this view, we can conceive of the PT's physical handling as
a two-way communication between embodied agents. CR is
shaped in this interactive communication process, which may help
to scaffold or enhance the patient's initiation of movement,
normally driven tacitly by body schema systems and pre-
reflective awareness of movement in goal orientated tasks.
Taken together, these concepts form the basis of an embodied
phenomenological approach that is best conceived in terms of an
enactive theory.
Enactive theory
Phenomenologically informed enactive views on embodied cog-
nition emphasize the idea that perception is ''for action'' (i.e.
action oriented) and that this action-orientation shapes most
cognitive processes (Noe¨, 2004). This approach is often accom-
panied with strong calls to radically change our ways of thinking
about body, brain, and mind (Gallagher and Varela, 2003;
Thompson,
2007;
Thompson
and
Varela,
2001;
Varela,
Thompson, and Rosch, 1991). On this view, the mind is not
simply ''in the head'' or reducible to brain processes; rather, it is
distributed across body and environment, to the extent that body
and environment dynamically scaffold or take over some of the
cognitive load (Menary, 2007). This implies that the PT's actions
and the patient's actions within the clinical encounter inform the
PTs CR there and then, in the physical and social environment of
the clinic.
Enactive theorists claim that bodily processes, as well as
environmental factors, shape, and contribute to the constitution of
consciousness and cognition in an irreducible and irreplaceable
way (Fuchs and De Jaegher, 2009; Noe¨, 2004). Specifically, on
the enactive view, biological aspects of bodily life, including
organismic and emotion regulation of the entire body, have a
permeating effect on cognition, as do processes of sensory-motor
coupling
between
organism
and
environment
(Bower
and
Gallagher, 2013; Hurley, 2002; Noe¨, 2004; O'Regan and Noe¨,
2001). In this respect, the notion of cognition is broadened to
include processes that happen between body and environment
(Bower and Gallagher, 2013; Noe¨, 2004; O'Regan and Noe¨,
2001). In problem solving, one does not necessarily think
everything through in a purely mental way. Rather, one may
discover a solution through the manipulation of different artifacts
or technologies in the local environment. This may be as simple
as using a pen and notebook to work out a mathematics problem
(Clark and Chalmers, 1998); arranging or manipulating the
environment to facilitate a certain complex task as a PT does
when promoting targeted activity, by exploring which height the
plinth should have to optimize sit to stand or where to arrange the
toys to catch the child's attention and facilitate optimal reaching.
In the clinical setting, such actions and environmental manipu-
lations help to scaffold CR.
In this regard, we should think of the PT's CR as both
embodied and enactive. For example, we can think of the PT's
handling of the patient's body as playing an important role in
reasoning in physical therapy (Normann, Sørgaard, Salvesen, and
Moe, 2013; Øberg, Blanchard, and Obstfelder, 2014). Perception
and cognition in the CR process can be modulated through actions
that involve the hand. Whether by putting hands on, feeling for
tension and resistance, or simply reaching and grasping, pointing,
or gesturing expressively, the brain partners with the hand and
forms a functional unit that properly engages with the PT's
environment (Øberg, Blanchard, and Obstfelder, 2014). Rather
than a top-down regulation of movement, brain to hand; or a
bottom-up emergence of rationality, hand to brain, neural
processes co-ordinate with and can be entrained by the hand
movements, forming a single integrated cognitive system (Iverson
and Thelen, 1999). This implies a reciprocal dynamics of feed-
forward-feed-back processes in which the hand and the brain form
a dynamic system that reaches into the world to explore the
patient's functional possibilities and problems.
Judgments made on the basis of visual observation of the body
at rest in various postural attitudes differ from judgments made in
the context of action or physical interaction between the PT and
the patient. In action, for example, the felt differentiation between
hand and arm across the wrist is reduced (de Vignemont, Majid,
Jola, and Haggard, 2009). That is, in action, the hand is not
experienced as a body part differentiated from the arm, but is
experienced as continuous with the arm; likewise the arm with the
shoulder. In action, the body schema functions in a holistic way
(in contrast to the perceptual and articulated aspects of body
image)
(Gallagher,
2005;
Tsakiris
and
Haggard,
2005).
Consequently, the PTs use of her own hands involves her body
schema more holistically as she addresses the patient's body, and
the manipulation of the patient's body also involves the patient's
body schema. Intercorporeity, as Merleau-Ponty (1962) conceives
it, refers to an intersubjective embodied interaction that involves
proprioception and kinaesthesia. This embodied engagement on
the part of the PT, and more generally, the relational interaction
between the PT and the patient, enters into the assessment of
sensibility and selective movement as well as performance of the
task in the particular setting (Øberg, Blanchard, and Obstfelder,
2014).
Interaction
Again, it is important to note that this kind of embodied
interaction is intersubjective, and as such, is not simply something
that one or the other individual accomplishes on his/her own.
248
G. K. Øberg et al.
Physiother Theory Pract, 2015; 31(4): 244-252

In the intersubjective context, perception is often for inter-action
with others, where perceptually guided embodied interaction
becomes part of the process that allows mutual understanding, and
generates meaning in a process of 'participatory sense-making'
(Table 1) (De Jaegher and Di Paolo, 2007; De Jaegher, Di Paolo,
and Gallagher, 2010; Gallagher, 2009).
To be clear, then, this kind of embodied interaction or
intercorporeity is not just a matter of the movement or manipu-
lation of a patient's limb. It involves an understanding of each
other based in part on facial expressions, postures, movements,
gestures, and the give and take of sensory-motor processes that
Trevarthen (1979) calls ''primary intersubjectivity''. This concept
is supported by evidence from developmental studies that suggest
infants engage in embodied intersubjective practices from birth
(Farroni, Massaccesi, Pividori, and Johnson, 2004; Meltzoff and
Keith Moore, 1994; Pascalis et al, 1995; Reddy, Markova, and
Wallot, 2013). In such engagements, timing and emotional
attunements are important. Although minor disturbances in
timing and attunement can be quickly repaired in the ongoing
interaction, more serious disruptions can lead to a failure of
understanding. In addition, since such interactive processes are
always situated (i.e. they always happen within particular
contexts), the participants' understanding of the context or
situation enters into their understandings of one another.
In this communicative practice, both PT and patient engage in
joint actions, and activity evolves in sequences as perception-
action loops. The PT and patient both perceive each other
simultaneously as being perceived by the other. In this ''dance'',
they coordinate to and with each other, creating matches and
occasionally mismatches as the interaction goes forward. Both
matches, as when movements improve which may indicate
improvement to their sense of agency and ownership as served
by an integrated body schema and body image, as well as
mismatches when quality of movement worsens and leads to
decreased experiences of agency and/or ownership inform the
process of CR. Through embodied CR, the PT's actions and
interactions with the patient allow for changes in the patient's
motor performance to occur (Normann, Sørgaard, Salvesen,
and Moe, 2014; Øberg, Blanchard, and Obstfelder, 2014).
According to Scho¨n (1991), surprises or unexpected outcomes
may facilitate reflection-in-action. Improvising on Scho¨n's (1991)
term ''reflection-in-action'', we suggest that the fuller account
ought to include reflection-in-interaction, where interaction is not
just dialogical or communicative, but involves joint action.
Interactional-embodied knowledge involves tuning in to each
other, which involves a process of coordinated and adjusted
movement loops in which the PT as a professional has the main
responsibility. There are various choices to be made there and
then, in the interaction, by both therapist and patient. For
example, with the patient in sitting in a flexed position, the PT
places the hands on each side of the patient's thorax and exerts
gradual pressure/facilitation of extension just to this point; the
patient moves with or against the PT. This is an ongoing process.
Often the choices are unarticulated, but are incorporated in the
interaction process. Through this process the PT, in a second-
person perspective, expands her knowledge regarding the patient's
movement problems and how to solve them. Likewise, patients
gain
more
insight
(through both
first-
and second-person
perspectives) into their own problems and possibilities for
improvement (Normann, Sørgaard, Salvesen, and Moe, 2013).
There are lessons to be learned from this for CR in physical
therapy. The clinical setting sets up certain expectations in the
patient and sets the stage for the PT's expert practice; it frames
the interaction and contributes to the co-creation of meaning and
the participatory sense making that characterizes successful
interactions. Physical environment and social context, accord-
ingly, contribute to ''secondary intersubjective'' understandings
(Trevarthen and Huble, 1978), that is, just those aspects of
understanding that are drawn from the particularities of the
situation, or in this case, the clinical setting. According to the
phenomenologically inspired enactive approach to intersubjective
social cognition, sometimes termed ''interaction theory'' (De
Jaegher, Di Paolo, and Gallagher, 2010; Gallagher and Hutto,
2008), both PTs and patients bring with them certain narratives to
the therapeutic session, including embodied narratives, that act as
background for their expectations (Gallagher and Hutto, 2008).
These narratives reflect both general social norms and specific
patterns of expectations concerning clinical practice. All these
factors - the embodied immediacy of primary intersubjectivity,
the contextualization involved in secondary intersubjectivity,
and the narrative background, complicate, but also enable CR.
As depicted in Figure 1, CR needs to draw on all these resources.
Figure
1.
Summary
of
intersubjective
communicative practice through
intercorporeity.
DOI: 10.3109/09593985.2014.1002873
Embodied-enactive clinical reasoning
249

Embodied and enactive clinical reasoning
On this model, the embodied CR process is accomplished in a
system where, in addition to ''in-the-head'' conceptual processing
and neural activations, non-conceptual and extra-neural factors of
body and environment contribute as well (Figure 1). For example,
decision making, as part of a CR process about how to optimize
efficiency of
reaching and
grasping, is
infrequently done
abstractly as a purely intellectual event. More frequently, it is a
judgment made by the therapist's gaze and hands as she observes
performance of the task and feels/guides/facilitates the arm of the
patient and feels a certain resistance, relaxation, or active
movement. Just as reasoning may be accomplished in intersub-
jective communicative practices where we reach a decision
through discussion, so reasoning to the right strategy in the
practice of physical therapy may be accomplished in an
intercorporeity; a proprioceptive and kinaesthetic communication
discovered as the therapist and the patient engage in an active/
interactive bodily exploration of movement possibilities in which
ongoing verbal discussion may be embedded.
For the PT, clinical reasoning requires multidimensional
knowledge in which theory, research, ethics, practical, and
personal experiences are integrated. As a professional, the PT
has the main responsibility for the co-construction of meaning in
the encounter. Simultaneously by capturing the cues, signs, and
symptoms of the patient as integral aspects of the embodied
(minimal and narrative) self, there will be a process of
coordination to and coordination with as described of Fuchs
and De Jaegher (2009). The former involves individual unidir-
ectional embodied actions (e.g. in the beginning of a session
while the PT orients herself and talks to the patient, or at the
very moment, when the PT puts her hands on the patient to feel
posture or movement). The latter, coordination with, in contrast,
involves interaction and encompasses coordination with the
patient. To a larger extent such coordination involves two active
participants (Figure 1); the PT as a lived body with her
multidimensional professional knowledge incorporated in prac-
tice, and the patient bringing forward his lived body, including
how he experiences and expresses his movement problems in the
situation. In these interchanges between PT and the patient
within a specific environment, both participants give and take
while using a variety of bodily expressions: gaze direction;
positioning; utterances and intonations; gestures; facial expres-
sions; and hands-on or other physical intentional interactions. In
working together, this kind of mutual coupling of their lived
bodies, with the aim of sorting out the patient's movement
disturbances, and then improving function, is an embodied CR
accomplished through joint attention and joint action and
resulting often in a shared agency and a participatory sense-
making.
Once we are in situations of joint attention we are able to
further enhance our understanding of others by observing how
they use things, how their motor performance evolves and, by
hands-on interaction, feel and incorporate the patient's posture
and way of moving (Fiebich and Gallagher, 2013; Gallagher,
2010). At the same time, the patient experiences the PT's touch
and facilitation of movement. Their body schemas and body
experiences of ownership and agency may expand and in a certain
way incorporate the perceived body of the other. This creates a
dynamical interplay, a kind of shared contextualized action that
generates a particular phenomenal basis for CR. At the same time,
it may inform patients about their own limitations and about
possibilities for improvement through such a process, something
evidenced in first-person reports of people with MS reporting on
their clinical experiences (Normann, Sørgaard, Salvesen, and
Moe, 2013).
Conclusion
In this paper, we have presented an extended CR framework and a
new model of enactive and embodied CR. This model provides
PTs with the concept of the embodied self as the source of
information, elaboration, and communication in partnership with
the patient. The model is rooted in the enactive phenomenological
view that understands the body as simultaneously experienced,
expressive, and action-oriented, as well as biological. The model
encompasses a reasoning process in which different sources of
experience, expression, and knowledge are integrated through
reflection-in-interaction. Furthermore, the model highlights the
fact that perception and the communication and the co-constitu-
tion of meaning through touch and movement are important
sources for the cues that contribute to the reasoning process
and the nuances of management. Through conceptions of the
body-as-subject, enactive engagement, and interaction, the model
integrates diagnostic and narrative reasoning with a phenomen-
ology of the body, to describe a fuller account of clinical
reasoning than previously reported.
Declaration of interest
The authors report no declarations of interest.
References
Bartlett DJ, Palisano RJ 2002 Physical therapists' perceptions of factors
influencing the acquisition of motor abilities of children with cerebral
palsy: Implications for clinical reasoning. Physical Therapy 82:
237-248.
Becchio C, Manera V, Sartori L, Cavallo A, Castiello U 2012 Grasping
intentions: From thought experiments to empirical evidence. Frontiers
in Human Neuroscience 6: 117. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2012.00117.
Bower M, Gallagher S 2013 Bodily affects as prenoetic elements in
enactive perception. Phenonenology and Mind 4: 78-93.
Brodal P 2004 The central nervous system: Structure and function.
Oxford, United Kingdom, Oxford University Press.
Bunniss S, Kelly DR 2010 Research paradigms in medical education
research. Medical Education 44: 358-366.
Campbell SK, Palisano RJ, Vander Linden DW 2012 Physical therapy for
children, 4th edn. St. Louis, MO, Elsevier Saunders.
Clark A, Chalmers D 1998 The extended mind. Analysis 58: 10-23.
Cole JD, Cole JO 1995 Pride and a daily marathon. Cambridge, The MIT
Press.
Craje C, van der Graaf C, Lem FC, Geurts AC, Steenbergen B 2010
Determining specificity of motor imagery training for upper limb
improvement in chronic stroke patients: A training protocol and pilot
results. International Journal of Rehabilitation Research 33: 359-362.
De
Jaegher
H,
Di
Paolo
E
2007
Participatory
sense-making.
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 6: 485-507.
De Jaegher H, Di Paolo E, Gallagher S 2010 Can social interaction
constitute social cognition? Trends in Cognitive Sciences 14: 441-447.
Dennett D 1991 Consciousness explained. Boston, Little, Brown & Co.
De Vignemont F 2010 Body schema and body image-Pros and cons.
Neuropsychologia 48: 669-680.
De Vignemont F, Majid A, Jola C, Haggard P 2009 Segmenting the body
into parts: Evidence from biases in tactile perception. Quarterly Journal
of Experimental Psychology 62: 500-512.
Dowds J, French H 2008 Undertaking CPD in the workplace in
physiotherapy. Physiotherapy Ireland 29: 11-19.
Edwards I, Braunack-Mayer A, Jones M 2005 Ethical reasoning as a
clinical-reasoning
strategy
in
physiotherapy.
Physiotherapy
91:
229-236.
Edwards I, Delany CM, Townsend AF, Swisher LL 2011 Moral agency as
enacted justice: A clinical and ethical decision-making framework for
responding to health inequities and social injustice. Physical Therapy
91: 1653-1663.
Edwards I, Jones M, Carr J, Braunack-Mayer A, Jensen GM 2004 Clinical
reasoning
strategies
in physical
therapy.
Physical
Therapy
84:
312-330.
Edwards I, Richardson B 2007 Clinical reasoning and population health:
Decision
making
for
an
emerging
paradigm
of
health
care.
Physiotherapy Theory and Practice 24: 183-193.
250
G. K. Øberg et al.
Physiother Theory Pract, 2015; 31(4): 244-252

Farroni T, Massaccesi S, Pividori D, Johnson MH 2004 Gaze following in
newborns. Infancy 5: 39-60.
Fiebich A, Gallagher S 2013 Joint attention in joint action. Philosophical
Psychology 26: 571-587.
French H, Dowds J 2008 An overview of continuing professional
development in physiotherapy. Physiotherapy 94: 190-197.
Fuchs T, De Jaegher H 2009 Enactive intersubjectivity: Participatory
sense-making and mutual incorporation. Phenomenology and the
Cognitive Sciences 8: 465-486.
Gallagher S 2000 Philosophical conceptions of the self: Implications for
cognitive science. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 4: 14-21.
Gallagher S 2001 Dimensions of embodiment: Body image and
body
schema
in
medical
contexts.
In:
Kay
Toombs
S
(ed)
Handbook of phenomenology and medicine, pp 147-175. New York,
Springer.
Gallagher S 2005 How the body shapes the mind. Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press.
Gallagher S 2009 Two problems of intersubjectivity. Journal of
Consciousness Studies 16: 289-308.
Gallagher S 2010 Joint attention, joint action, and participatory sense
making. Alter: Revue de Phe`nome`nologie 18: 111-124.
Gallagher S 2012 Phenomenology. London, Palgrave-Macmillan.
Gallagher S, Cole J 1995 Body image and body schema in a deafferented
subject. Journal of Mind and Behavior 16: 369-390.
Gallagher S, Hutto D 2008 Understanding others through primary
interaction and narrative practice. In: Zlatev J, Racine T, Sinha C,
Itkonen E (eds) The shared mind: Perspectives on intersubjectivity.
Converging evidence in language and communication research, Vol.
12, pp 17-38. Amsterdam, John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Gallagher S, Vaever M 2004 Disorders of embodiment. In: Radden J (ed)
The philosophy of psychiatry. A companion, pp 118-132. Oxford,
Oxford University Press.
Gallagher S, Varela F 2003 Redrawing the map and resetting the time:
Phenomenology and the cognitive sciences. Canadian Journal of
Philosophy 29: 93-132.
Gibson BE, Nixon SA, Nicholls DA 2010 Critical reflections on the
physiotherapy profession in Canada. Physiotherapy Canada 62:
98-100.
Greenfield BH, Jensen GM 2010 Understanding the lived experiences of
patients: Application of a phenomenological approach to ethics.
Physical Therapy 90: 1185-1197.
Groom KN, Ng WK, Kevorkian CG, Levy JK 1999 Ego-syntonic alien
hand syndrome after right posterior cerebral artery stroke. Archives of
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 80: 162-165.
Haggard P 2005 Conscious intention and motor cognition. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences 9: 290-295.
Hammar GR, Ozolins A, Idvall E, Rudebeck CE 2009 Body image in
adolescents with cerebral palsy. Journal of Child Health Care 13:
19-29.
Higgs J 2008 Clinical reasoning in the health professions. New York,
Elsevier Health Sciences.
Higgs J, Jones M 2008 Clinical decision making and multiple problem
spaces. In: Higgs J (ed) Clinical reasoning in the health professions,
pp 3-17. New York, Elsevier Health Sciences.
Higgs J, Titchen A 2001 Practice knowledge and expertise in the health
professions, pp 397-400. Oxford, Butterworth-Heinemann.
Hurley SL 2002 Consciousness in action. London, Harvard University
Press.
Husserl E 2012 Ideas - General introduction to pure phenomenology.
Hoboken, Taylor and Francis.
Ietswaart M, Johnston M, Dijkerman HC, Joice S, Scott CL, MacWalter
RS, Hamilton SJ 2011 Mental practice with motor imagery in stroke
recovery:
Randomized
controlled
trial
of
efficacy.
Brain
134:
1373-1386.
Iverson JM, Thelen E 1999 Hand, mouth and brain. The dynamic
emergence of speech and gesture. Journal of Consciousness Studies 6:
11-12.
Jensen GM, Gwyer J, Shepard KF, Hack LM 2000 Expert practice in
physical therapy. Physical Therapy 80: 28-43.
Jones
M,
Jensen
G,
Edwards
I
2008
Clinical
reasoning
in
physiotherapy. In: Higgs J, Jones M (eds) Clinical reasoning in
the health professions, pp 245-256. Oxford, Boston, Melbourne,
Butterworth-Heinemann.
Kenyon LK 2013 The hypothesis-oriented pediatric focused algorithm: A
framework for clinical reasoning in pediatric physical therapist
practice. Physical Therapy 93: 413-420.
Keppel CC, Crowe SF 2000 Changes to body image and self-esteem
following stroke in young adults. Neuropsychological Rehabilitation
10: 15-31.
Maravita A, Spence C, Driver J 2003 Multisensory integration and the
body schema: Close to hand and within reach. Current Biology 13:
R531-R539.
Mattingly C 1991 The narrative nature of clinical reasoning. American
Journal of Occupational Therapy 45: 998-1005.
Meltzoff
AN,
Keith
Moore
M
1994
Imitation,
memory,
and
the representation of persons. Infant Behavior and Development 17:
83-99.
Menary R 2007 Cognitive integration: Mind and cognition unbounded.
UK, Palgrave Macmillan.
Menary R 2008 Embodied narratives. Journal of Consciousness Studies
15: 63-84.
Merleau-Ponty M 1962 Phenomenology of perception, p. 182. London,
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Nicholls
DA,
Gibson
BE
2010
The
body
and
physiotherapy.
Physiotherapy Theory and Practice 26: 497-509.
Nicholls DA, Holmes D 2012 Discipline, desire, and transgression in
physiotherapy
practice.
Physiotherapy
Theory
and
Practice
28:
454-465.
Noe¨ A 2004 Action in perception. Cambridge, MIT Press.
Normann B 2013 Physiotherapy and professional clinical guidance in an
out-patient clinic for people with multiple sclerosis. Body and move-
ment in sense making and professional development. Degree of Doctor
of Philosophy, University of Tromsø, Tromsø, Norway.
Normann B, Sørgaard KW, Salvesen R, Moe S 2013 Contextualized
perceptions of movement as a source of expanded insight: People with
multiple sclerosis' experience with physiotherapy. Physiotherapy
Theory and Practice 29: 19-30.
Normann B, Sørgaard KW, Salvesen R, Moe S 2014 Clinical guidance of
community physiotherapists regarding people with MS: Professional
development
and
continuity
of
care.
Physiotherapy
Research
International 19: 25-33.
Øberg GK, Blanchard Y, Obstfelder A 2014 Therapeutic encounters with
preterm infants: Interaction, posture and movement. Physiotherapy
Theory and Practice 30: 1-5.
Ogden JA 2005 Fractured minds: A case-study approach to clinical
neuropsychology. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
O'Regan JK, Noe¨ A 2001 A sensorimotor account of vision and visual
consciousness. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 24: 939-972.
Palisano RJ 2010 Practice knowledge: The forgotten aspect of evidence-
based practice. Physical & Occupational Therapy in Pediatrics 30:
261-263.
Pascalis O, de Schonen S, Morton J, Deruelle C, Fabre-Grenet M 1995
Mother's face recognition by neonates: A replication and an extension.
Infant Behavior and Development 18: 79-85.
Pribram KH 1999 Brain and the composition of conscious experience. Of
deep and surface structure; frames of reference; episode and executive;
models and monitors. Journal of Consciousness Studies 6: 19-42.
Reddy V, Markova G, Wallot S 2013 Anticipatory adjustments to being
picked up in infancy. PLoS One 8: e65289.
Sala CM 1998 Disentangling the alien and anarchic hand. Cognitive
Neuropsychiatry 3: 191-207.
Scho¨n DA 1991 The reflective practitioner. London, Maurice Temple
Smith Ltd.
Shaw JA, Connelly DM 2012 Phenomenology and physiotherapy: Meaning
in research and practice. Physical Therapy Reviews 17: 398-408.
Shumway-Cook A, Woollacott MH 2007 Motor control: Translating
research into clinical practice. Philadelphia, Wolters Kluwer Health.
Shumway-Cook A, Woollacott MH 2012 Motor control: Translating
research into clinical practice. Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins.
Stokes M 2004 Physical management in neurological rehabilitation. New
York, Elsevier Health Sciences.
Taub E 2004 Harnessing brain plasticity through behavioral techniques to
produce new treatments in neurorehabilitation. American Psychologist
59: 692-704.
Thompson E 2007 Mind in life: Biology, phenomenology, and the
sciences of mind. London, Harvard University Press.
Thompson E, Varela FJ 2001 Radical embodiment: Neural dynamics and
consciousness. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 5: 418-425.
Thornquist E 2006 Face-to-face
and hands-on:
Assumptions
and
assessments in the physiotherapy clinic. Medical Anthropology 25:
65-97.
DOI: 10.3109/09593985.2014.1002873
Embodied-enactive clinical reasoning
251

Tow AM, Chua H 1998 The alien hand sign - Case report and review of
the literature. Annals of the Academy of Medicine, Singapore 27:
582-585.
Trevarthen C 1979 Communication and cooperation in early infancy: A
description of primary intersubjectivity. In: Bullowa M (ed) Before
Speech: The Beginning of Interpersonal Communication, pp 321-347.
London, Cambridge University Press.
Trevarthen C, Huble P 1978 Secondary intersubjectivity: Confidence,
confiding and acts of meaning in the first year. In: Lock A (ed) Action,
gesture and symbol: The emergence of language, pp 183-229. New
York, Academic Press.
Tsakiris M, Haggard P 2005 Experimenting with the acting self.
Cognitive Neuropsychology 22: 387-407.
Tsakiris M, Hesse MD, Boy C, Haggard P, Fink GR 2007 Neural
signatures of body ownership: A sensory network for bodily self-
consciousness. Cerebral Cortex 17: 2235-2244.
Tsakiris M, Prabhu G, Haggard P 2006 Having a body versus moving
your body: How agency structures body-ownership. Consciousness and
Cognition 15: 423-432.
Varela FJ, Thompson ET, Rosch E 1991 The embodied mind: Cognitive
science and human experience. Cambridge, The MIT Press.
Wainwright SF, Shepard KF, Harman LB, Stephens J 2010 Novice and
experienced physical therapist clinicians: A comparison of how
reflection is used to inform the clinical decision-making process.
Physical Therapy 90: 75-88.
Wikstro¨m-Grotell C, Eriksson K 2012 Movement as a basic concept in
physiotherapy - A human science approach. Physiotherapy Theory and
Practice 28: 428-438.
World Confederation of Physical Therapy 2013 The chartered society of
physiotherapy. www.csp.org.uk.
World Health Organization 2001 International classification of function-
ing, disability and health (ICF). Geneva, WHO.
252
G. K. Øberg et al.
Physiother Theory Pract, 2015; 31(4): 244-252

