Gallagher, S. (in press). The overextended mind. Versus: Quaderni di studi semiotici. 
 
 
The overextended mind 
Shaun Gallagher 
Philosophy and Cognitive Sciences 
Institute of Simulation and Training 
University of Central Florida (USA) 
University of Hertfordshire (UK) 
gallaghr@mail.ucf.edu 
 
 
 
Clark and Chalmers (1998) introduced the concept of the extended mind, in 
part to move beyond the standard Cartesian idea that cognition is something 
that happens in a private mental space, "in the head."  In this paper I want to 
pursue a liberal interpretation of this idea, extending the mind to include 
processes that occur within social and cultural institutions.  At the same time 
I want to address some concerns that have been raised about whether such 
processes actually constitute cognitive processes, so that we think of the 
mind as extended, or whether environmental and institutional factors are 
simply causal supports for cognition, which, essentially, continues to occur 
only in the head.1   I start with what Clark and Chalmers have called the 
parity principle. 
 
If, as we confront some task, a part of the world functions as a 
process which, were it to go on in the head, we would have no 
hesitation in recognizing as part of the cognitive process, then 
that part of the world is (so we claim) part of the cognitive 
process. (Clark and Chalmers 1998, p. 8) 
 
 
On a strict interpretation this principle appears to measure cognition in 
terms of the Cartesian gold standard of what goes on in the head.  It suggests 
that a process outside of the head counts as cognitive only if in principle it 
could be accomplished in the head (or at least imagined to be so) - 
conforming to the (minimal) Cartesian concept of mental process as 
                                                        
1 Different versions of this paper were presented in 2009 at the Concluding Meeting of the 
European Science Foundation supported Consciousness in Natural and Cultural Contexts (CNCC), 
University of Edinburgh, and the conference on Embodied Virtues and Expertise at the University 
of Wollongong, Australia.  I thank participants at those conferences for their comments, and the 
ESF-CNCC-BASIC project for funding. In this paper I draw on some material found in 
Gallagher and Crisafi (2009) and Crisafi and Gallagher (2009).  In those papers we made 
reference to Hegel's idea of objective spirit and the externalization of the mind in social 
institutions.  The idea can be explicated without reference to Hegel, and here I make no use 
of his philosophy. 

something that would normally happen in the head.  Thus, we might think of 
some mental processes as happening "out there" in the world, yet still have a 
principled reason to limit mental processes to the kinds of things that fit a 
standard although slightly extended model.  
Clark (2008, p. 114) rejects this interpretation, insisting that the 
parity principle should not be interpreted as requiring any similarity 
between inner and outer processes. Wheeler (2006, 3) explains that the 
parity principle does not "fix the benchmarks for what it is to count as a 
proper part of a cognitive system by identifying all the details of the causal 
contribution made by (say) the brain [and then by looking] to see if any 
external elements meet those benchmarks."   This reading is consistent with 
the functionalist account that both Clark and Wheeler embrace.  The worry 
that comes along with this liberal interpretation is that the concept of mind 
gets overextended to include any process in the world (the "cognitive bloat" 
worry). Thus, even as he allows for the liberal interpretation of the parity 
principle, Clark starts to tighten it up again with a set of additional criteria 
that need to be met by external physical processes if they are to be included 
as part of an individual's cognitive process.  He lists three criteria. 
 
1. That the external resource be reliably available and typically 
invoked. 
 
2. That any information thus retrieved be more‐or‐less 
automatically endorsed. It should not usually be subject to 
critical scrutiny (unlike the opinions of other people, for 
example). It should be deemed about as trustworthy as 
something retrieved clearly from biological memory. 
 
3. That information contained in the resource should be easily 
accessible as and when required. (Clark 2008, 79) 
 
 
The parity principle plus these criteria rule over the primary and much 
discussed example of extended cognition provided by Clark and Chalmers: 
the example of Otto and Inga. 
 
First, consider a normal case of belief embedded in memory. 
[Inga wants to go to MOMA, and remembers where it is].... It 
seems clear that Inga believes that the museum is on 53rd 
Street, and that she believed this even before she consulted her 
memory. It was not previously an occurrent belief, but then 
neither are most of our beliefs. The belief was somewhere in 
memory, waiting to be accessed.  ... Now consider Otto. Otto 
suffers from Alzheimer's disease, and like many Alzheimer's 
patients, he relies on information in the environment to help 
structure his life. Otto carries a notebook around with him 

everywhere he goes. When he learns new information, he 
writes it down. When he needs some old information, he looks it 
up. For Otto, his notebook plays the role usually played by a 
biological memory. Today, Otto hears about the exhibition at 
the Museum of Modern Art, and decides to go see it. He consults 
the notebook, which says that the museum is on 53rd Street, so 
he walks to 53rd Street and goes into the museum. (Clark and 
Chalmers 1998, 12‐13) 
 
 
The notebook, for Otto, clearly plays the same role that memory plays for 
Inga.  The belief, in Otto's case, supervenes on processes that lie "beyond the 
skin" when in fact Otto engages with those non‐neural processes.  
Alzheimer's disease aside, we all may use similar memory enhancing tricks 
as Otto.  If we have poor memories for directions or addresses, then with 
paper and pencil we use technology to do something that we could do, with a 
little more effort, in our head.  Or perhaps we enhance our cognitive 
performance with other technology.  Imagine looking up directions on 
Google, downloading them into your phone, and then using your phone to 
find your way.  We seemingly are able to store our memories, and activate 
beliefs about where things are located, using such instruments. I can't 
remember where the restaurant is, but I plus my technology can.   
One of the problems with this, and similar examples, as I see it, is that 
it starts with a concept of the mind that the extended mind hypothesis is 
really trying to challenge.  Specifically, the three criteria are worked out in 
terms of how we might deal with  beliefs or "beliefs embedded in memory."  
Clark (2008) then generalizes the criteria to apply to all cognitive processes.   
The controlling conception of the mind that guides the application of the 
three criteria, then, is that the mind is constituted by beliefs, desires, and 
other propositional attitudes, as well as representations, informational states 
- where the term "resources" is taken to signify just such phenomena.  But 
these criteria do not necessarily apply to all cognition, especially if one thinks 
of cognition in terms of enactive cognitive processes and activities, e.g., 
problem solving, interpreting, judging, rather than in terms of mental states, 
or contents, e.g., beliefs, information.  In what follows I want to argue for a 
liberal extension of the extended mind hypothesis, and I do so by first 
introducing an example that views cognitive processes as more like solving 
problems than like holding a belief.  
 
Mental institutions 
Certain social institutions (including social practices) are what we might call 
'mental institutions' (Gallagher and Crisafi 2009), in the sense that they are 
institutions that help us to accomplish certain cognitive processes.  Indeed, 
without them, specific classes of cognitive processes would simply not exist.  
They are at least enabling conditions, and on the most liberal reading, 

constitutive of those processes.2  Examples include things like legal systems, 
educational systems, cultural institutions, like museums, and even the 
institution of science itself.   In each case a mental institution 
  
1. includes cognitive practices that are produced in specific times and 
places, and  
2. is activated in ways that extend our cognitive processes when we 
engage with them (that is, when we interact with, or are coupled to 
these systems in the right way).  
 
Here I'll consider the legal system as a good example.  One way to think of the 
institution of law is to begin by thinking of people making claims on 
property, the appropriation and use of which immediately puts us in certain 
kinds of relations to others, relations which grow in complexity, and 
necessitate the use of contracts.  A contract (as a legal agreement, not just the 
piece of paper) is in some real sense an expression of several minds 
externalized and extended into the world, instantiating in external memory 
an agreed‐upon decision, adding to a system of rights and laws that 
transcend the particularities of any individual's mind.  Contracts are 
institutions that embody conceptual schemas that, in turn, contribute to and 
shape our cognitive processes.  As such they are used as tools to accomplish 
certain aims, to reinforce certain behaviors, and to solve certain problems.  
Institutions of property, contract, rights, and law not only guide our thinking 
about social arrangements, for example, or about what we can and cannot do, 
but allow us to think in ways that were not possible without such 
institutions.  Insofar as we cognitively engage with such tools and institutions 
we extend and transform our cognitive processes. 
The legal system is constructed in part in these cognitive processes.  
The use of the legal system in the administration of justice, or the application 
of law to particular cases, are cognitive processes - a cognitive event through 
and through.  These are not processes, however, that happen simply in the 
individual brains of judge, jury, defense attorney, prosecutor, etc.  Of course 
we usually think of judgments as happening in the privacy of one's own head. 
But some judgments supervene on external practices and processes that 
allow manipulation of a large amount of empirical information.  In a court of 
law, for example, evidence and testimony are produced, and judgments are 
made following a set of rules that are established by the system. The process 
in which the judgments get made will depend on a body of law, the relevant 
parts of which come to the fore because of the precise particulars of the case, 
and as we remain cognitively engaged as the proceedings develop.  
Consider an example that involves three different scenarios. 
 
                                                        
2 See De Jaegher, Di Paolo, and Gallagher (in press) for the distinction between 'contextual 
factor', 'enabling condition', and 'constitutive process'.   

1. Alexis is given a set of facts and is presented a collection of 
evidence and is asked to judge the legitimacy of a certain claim that 
is being made on the basis of her own subjective sense of fairness. 
To make her judgment Alexis must weigh the facts and consider the 
evidence entirely in her own head, without help or interference 
from others. In this process she draws up and considers three 
questions about the facts, tries to answer them the best she can, 
and in that way forms her judgment. 
 
2. Alexis is given a set of facts and is presented a collection of 
evidence and is asked to judge the legitimacy of a certain claim that 
is being made.  This time, however, she is given the three questions 
by a group of experts who provide a set of possible answers from 
which she may choose. She still has to figure out what principles to 
use in answering the questions and forming her judgment. She 
considers the three questions, tries to answer them the best she 
can, and in that way forms her judgment. 
 
3. Alexis is given a set of facts and is presented a collection of 
evidence and is asked to judge the legitimacy of a certain claim that 
is being made.  As in (2), she is asked to consider the same three 
questions from a group of experts who again provide a set of 
possible answers from which she may choose.  This time they also 
provide a set of pre‐established rules she must follow in answering 
the questions.  
 
How much cognitive processing, or let's say cognitive effort, is present in 
these cases?  All three cases are similar in respect to cognitive effort.  In the 
first case, however, Alexis does all of the work in her own head. In the second 
case, there may be less cognitive effort on her part since she did not have to 
draw up the questions, and the possible answers were already provided so 
she did not have to think them up. But overall, there seems to be an equal 
amount of cognitive effort going on, distributed across a number of 
participants - including the experts.  In the third case there may be even less 
cognitive effort going on in Alexis' head ‐‐ she not only doesn't have to draw 
up the questions and possible answers, she doesn't have to produce the 
principles or rules required to make the judgment.  Quite possibly there is 
less cognitive effort going on in the heads of the experts too, since they may 
be simply informing her of possible answers and rules that have been pre‐
established, e.g., in the legal system.   The possible answers and rules have 
been instituted by previous practice and are made available for the juror.  
Indeed, we could say that such questions, possible answers, and rules create 
the tracks along which the cognitive process must run to keep it, literally, 
legitimate. The possible answers and rules are part of a system - stored in a 
system - that these people become cognitively engaged with.  Moreover, they 
were previously established in some kind of process that we would certainly 

call cognitive.  Over all, in a distributed sense, there is an equal amount (if not 
more) cognitive effort to be found in the third case. 
 
Consider now a fourth scenario.  Alex attended law school and has gained a 
certain expertise in legal matters.   When faced with precisely the same 
situation as Alexis in (1) - i.e., left on his own resources to formulate a 
judgment about a certain state of affairs - his resources allow him to 
organize his judging process using precisely those questions, possible 
answers, and rules provided by the legal system to Alexis in (3).  Even on the 
conservative reading of the parity principle, we would have to say that if we 
count as cognitive the kinds of processes going on in Alex's head (although 
quite possibly Alex uses a variety of media and technology that are part of a 
specific legal system in order to do what he does), then we would also have 
to count as cognitive the kind of process that Alexis is engaged with, even if 
some of the elements are instituted in the system and only available to her 
externally. 
Judgments, then, are not necessarily confined to individual brains, or 
even to the many brains that constitute a particular court.  They emerge in 
the workings of a large and complex institution. Yet these judgments and 
legal proceedings are cognitive processes that then contribute to the 
continued working of the system in the form of precedents. The practice of 
law, which is constituted by just such cognitive and communicative 
processes, is carried out via the cooperation of many people relying on 
external (and conventional) cognitive schemas and rules of evidence 
provided by the legal institution itself.  A judgment made in such contexts is a 
form of cognition that supervenes on a large and complex system without 
which it could not happen. Indeed, it's a cognitive practice that in principle 
could not happen just in the head.  Even in the case of Alex, who seemingly 
does do it in his head, what he does depends not only on the fact that he has 
engaged in the workings of the legal (or educational) system (by attending 
law school), but on the ongoing workings of the legal system since what he 
does is what it is - a legal judgment - only in that system.  An individual 
required to make judgments about the legitimacy of certain arrangements 
interacts with the legal institution and forms a coupled system in a way that 
allows new cognitive processes to emerge.  Take away the external part of 
this cognitive process - take away the legal institution - and "the system's 
behavioural competence will drop, just as it would if we removed part of its 
brain" (Clark and Chalmers 1998, p. 9). 
We create these institutions via our own (shared) mental processes, 
or we inherit them as products constituted in mental processes already 
accomplished by others.  We then engage with these institutions to do 
further cognitive work.  If we think of the mind not as a repository of 
propositional attitudes and information, but as a dynamic process involved in 
solving problems and controlling behavior and action - in dialectical, 
transformative relations with the environment - then we extend our 

cognitive reach by engaging with tools, technologies, but also with 
institutions.  
Cognition as it is extended in social institutions, transforms our 
cognitive practices.  Such institutions allow us to engage in cognitive 
activities that we are unable to do purely in the head, or even in many heads.  
If we are justified in saying that working with a notebook or a calculator is 
mind‐extending, it seems equally right to say that working with the law, the 
use of the legal system in the practice of legal argumentation, deliberation 
and judgment, as well as the enforcement of law for purposes of controlling 
behavior is mind‐extending too.  This view pushes us beyond the strictly 
defined parity principle and extends the mind to a degree that even the 
liberal interpretation might have reservations about.  Is the concept of 
mental institutions too large - an overextended mind - or is Clark and 
Chalmers' concept of the extended mind not large enough?   
 
Parity principle revisited 
 
Consider again Clark's three criteria: "resources" should be 
 
1. Reliably available and typically invoked. 
2. Automatically endorsed - not subject to critical scrutiny - 
trustworthy. 
3. Easily accessible 
 
Each criterion involves matters of degree.  What counts as reliably available 
(1), or easily accessible (3), for example?  Call my attorney; I'm sure she'll tell 
you.  It certainly seems that a legal system, or some part of it, may be reliably 
available even if I don't carry it in my pocket.  It may be only a phone call 
away.  It also likely introduces more long‐term stability and reliability 
unavailable in a single biological system.  My attorney can consult her law 
books and codes, and together, in this process, and relying on easily 
accessible information and the mechanisms of the law, we can think through 
the problem and answer the question in a reliable way, or take action that 
leads to that result.  Answering the question, solving the cognitive problem, 
may in fact be impossible without that access to the legal system.  Indeed, 
one could imagine a specific kind of question that would never even come up 
if there were no legal system.  The legal system in effect helps to generate 
certain cognitive events, and helps to resolve them.  
With regard to the second criterion, why should some process that 
would otherwise count as a cognitive process not count as a cognitive 
process because it requires critical scrutiny, which is itself a cognitive 
process?  There are plenty of instances of taking a critical metacognitive 
perspective (which is, of course, a cognitive process) on other problem 
solving acts of cognition.   Taking such a perspective is itself a cognitive 
process, and again, in certain instances, that process may necessitate an 
institution like the law.  That is, some critical perspectives are clearly legal 

perspectives that supervene on a legal institution, and do so in a way that is 
even more "trustworthy" than biological memory. 
More prolonged and complex external processes involve many 
elements, including processes that depend on social institutions.  Despite the 
complexity, however, they may be more (or less) reliable; they may be (more 
or) less easy to access as a whole; and they may require some critical 
metacognitive scrutiny.  But such things should not disqualify them from 
being cognitive processes.  
Lack of parity along these lines should not disqualify such processes 
from being considered cognitive if they are processes to which the human 
organism is linked in the right way, that is, "in a two‐way interaction, 
creating a coupled system that can be seen as a cognitive system in its own 
right" (Clark and Chalmers 1998, p. 8).   Accordingly, we can start to see that 
human cognition relies not simply on localized brain processes in any 
particular individual, or on short‐term uses of notebooks, tools and 
technologies, but often on social processes that extend over long periods of 
time.  
 
Answering some objections 
 
In this final section I want to give some quick indications of how I would 
respond to some of the standard objections that have been raised against the 
extended mind hypothesis, and would likely be raised against this over‐
extended conception of mind.  For reasons of economy and space I will not be 
able to develop full‐fledged responses, but only indications of the directions 
in which I would take my responses.  
Larry Shapiro (in press), in his review of Adams and Aizawa (2009), 
writes:  
 
When I dig a hole, the shovel aids me in this task, and it may even be 
true that I could not dig the hole without the shovel.  But this does not 
extend my musculature into [things that are] independent of my 
musculature.  According to Adams and Aizawa the same story holds 
true, mutatis mutandis, for cognition and its external accessories. 
 
But the point is not that I extend my musculature - the point is that my 
digging is something extended from my bodily musculature across the shovel 
and into the ground.  No one claims that I extend my brain by using a 
notepad, but rather that I extend the cognitive process.  Nonetheless, as we 
know from neuroscience, such extensions may transform our brain; e.g., 
there are plastic remappings of somatosensory cortex for ego‐centric coding 
of arm position when we use tools (Bassolino et al. 2009); and there are the 
famous studies of the enlarged hippocampi of London taxi drivers (Mcguire 
et al. 2000).  If prolonged cognitive practices in an urban transportation 
system can change one's brain, then it is not unlikely that prolonged 

cognitive practices in a legal system could do the same for attorneys, judges, 
etc.  
The point here is that as we engage with externalities our cognitive 
processes - including our neural processes, but not just our neural processes 
- are transformed.  Externalities are not neutral in this respect.  Mental 
practices are not simply externalized in the objective accomplishments or 
products of cognition, they extend into some of their externalizations as we 
engage with them to do further cognitive activity.   
One of the most serious objections to the extended mind is the idea 
that even if externalities play a role in cognition, they play only a contextual 
or an enabling or causal role rather than a constitutive role.  All of the real 
constituting action of cognition happens in the brain, even if it is in some way 
supported or facilitated by external elements.  I think this objection is too 
closely tied to the conception of the mind that the extended mind hypothesis 
is rejecting. I want to suggest that we get beyond this issue by taking up a 
new conception of the mind, and a new understanding of how the brain 
works.  Here I want to take seriously the idea that the term 'extended' goes 
along with (and not in opposition to) other terms: 'embodied', 'embedded', 
and 'enactive'.   We need to conceive of the brain, not as the place where all 
the mental processing and representing happens, but as part of a larger, 
embodied and environmentally embedded system; and we need to conceive 
of the mind, not on a functionalist interpretation (pace Clark, Wheeler, and 
many others), but as enactively generated in the specific interactions of 
organism‐environment (where environment is social as well as physical). 
The mind, not as a collection of propositional attitudes, representations, 
mental states, etc., all of which have intrinsic or non‐derived content, but the 
mind as an enactive and emotionally embedded engagement with the world 
through which we solve problems, control behavior, understand, judge, 
explain, and generally do certain kinds of things.  On this conception, the 
mind is constituted primarily by just such activities, and anything that we 
might consider propositional attitudes are derivative and are inexplicable 
except in reference to such activities. 
To include mental institutions in the notion of extended mind seems 
to be a good example of cognitive bloat, where cognition extends to all kinds 
of processes that seem at odds with the very notion (or the very traditional 
notion) of cognition.  If my mind is extended by my use of Google to solve a 
problem, does that mean that cognitive processing is ongoing everywhere in 
cyberspace?  Rowlands (2009), in response to the cognitive bloat argument, 
has suggested that part of what qualifies a process as cognitive is that it is 
owned by the agent.  This notion of ownership, however, doesn't seem to 
apply to mental institutions - no one owns the legal system, for example.  
Here, however, we might adopt a Lockean notion of ownership - ownership 
is constituted by the work invested - i.e., it is the fact that I am engaged in the 
right way with mental institutions, and this engagement makes them a 
constituent part of my cognitive process.  Only so far as I am engaged with 
these institutions (or with notebooks or pieces of technology), do they 

contribute to the constitution of my cognitive processes; and if I am not 
engaged with them (just as some neuronal processes in my brain may remain 
unactivated in specific circumstances) then they are not cognitively 
activated.  Rupert (2009, 131) discusses  "densely interactive processes" - 
"those in which the organism and environment affect each other in an 
ongoing way."  It seems clear that such densely interactive engagement or 
enactive coupling with those non‐neural aspects would push out the defining 
limit for the concept of cognition. What constitutes the cognitive is tied to the 
specific kind of engagement that's involved.  
One attempt to answer the question of where cognition stops and 
something non‐cognitive begins is to ask about "the mark of the mental" (see 
Adams and Aziawa 2009).  Adams and Aizawa (2009) suggest that it is non‐
derived content.  But the concept of non‐derived content is not on settled 
ground.  As Shapiro (in press) notes, "there is today no received theory of 
how original content comes to be in the first place," and this means that it 
might be possible to find a theory of non‐derived content that is consistent 
with extended cognition.  Others have appealed to intentionality (following 
Brentano's idea) as that mark (e.g., Menary 2009).  Again, however, there is a 
good deal of disagreement about intentionality.  Surely, for example, the 
experience of pain is a mental experience, but is it intentional?  (see Crane 
1998 for discussion).  And some, including Husserl and Searle, have argued 
that not all mental experience is intentional.  Furthermore, the argument this 
solution is meant to solve is simply repeated again if, as some claim, some 
forms of intentionality are purely internalistic (see, e.g., Horgan and Tienson 
2002).   
Fortunately, however, we can set such considerations aside because 
the question about the mark of the mental is not the right question, whatever 
the right answer might be to it. The question about the mark of the mental is 
not a question that can be answered without first determining whether some 
cognitive processes are extended, otherwise it amounts to question begging.  
In any case, it is not clear that anyone is claiming that all mental processes 
are extended or that those processes that are extended will have the same 
common features of non‐extended mental processes.  Clark (2010) and 
others, for example, deny that consciousness per se is extended; and no one 
argues that all aspects of the mental can be viewed as extended. Regardless 
of what is to be said about mental experience overall, I have been focusing on 
cognitive aspects found in such things as problem solving, judging, 
evaluation, and so forth.  These "epistemic actions" are what I am calling 
cognitive.    What kind of engagements or processes count as cognitive - what 
makes the action an epistemic action?  
In this regard I appeal to a hermeneutical measure. What constitutes 
cognition as cognition (and as the kind of mental process that can be extended) is 
its interpretive character, where interpretation involves an interpreter (an 
experiencing subject, an agent) engaged with something (which is often other than 
itself, but sometimes just itself) in a process that produces meaning for the 
interpreter.  We might think of the "with something" as a way to bring 

intentionality into the picture.  But the idea that cognition is meaning-producing 
or sense-making brings something else into the picture.  As enactive approaches 
to cognition have suggested, sense-making processes involve interaction and have 
a certain autonomy, that is, they are not necessarily under an individual agent's 
complete control, but often transcend the agent's subjective processes.  De 
Jaegher, Di Paolo, and Gallagher (in press) make this case in the realm of social 
cognition where they define social interaction as a two-way phenomenon.  Social 
interaction specifically involves others, and patterns of engagement that can 
acquire their own form of self-organisation through mutual regulation.  In the 
current context of extended cognition, where we can speak of interaction with 
institutions as well as with tools, instruments, technologies, etc., the point is that 
cognition just is any interaction or engagement that produces meaning for the 
agent, even if it is not the case that all mental experience necessarily produces 
meaning (e.g., pain), i.e., even if it is not the case that all mental experience is 
cognition.  
 
Conclusions 
It seems clear that the use of a legal system to solve a legal problem 
constitutes a case of complex "epistemic action," and is an instance of 
extended cognition. "In all these cases the individual brain performs some 
operations, while others are delegated to manipulations of external media" 
(Clark and Chalmers 1998, p. 8).   A legal system is a good example of this 
kind of sense‐making process which supervenes on institutions and practices 
that exist outside of the head, but so are other types of institutions, including 
political, military, economic, religious, and cultural institutions, as well as 
science itself.  
It is important to note, finally, that this over‐extended version of the 
extended mind hypothesis motivates a critical normative perspective. 
Institutional structures, especially, can shape the way that we use certain 
technologies, and can allow us to see certain possibilities even as they blind 
us to others.  We should take a closer and critical look at how social and 
cultural practices either productively extend or, in some cases, curtail mental 
processes.  Pieces of technology, as well as specific institutions, offer 
possibilities, which at the same time carry our cognitive processes in 
particular directions.  Such processes can have profound effects on us, and on 
our thinking. We should ask what the mechanisms and institutions do to us 
as subjects of cognition.  
 
References 
 
Adams,  F.  and  Aizawa,  K.  2008.  The  Bounds  of  Cognition.  Malden,  MA: 
Blackwell. 
Bassolino, M., Serino, A. Ubaldi, S. and Ladavas, E. 2009. Everyday use of the 
computer 
mouse 
extends 
peripersonal 
space 
representation.  
Neuropsychologia, Nov. 18. E‐publication prior to print.  

Clark,  A.  2009.  Spreading  the  joy?  Why  the  machinery  of  consciousness  is 
(probably) still in the head. Mind 118: 963‐993; doi:10.1093/mind/fzp110 
Clark, A. 2008. Supersizing the Mind: Reflections on Embodiment, Action, and 
Cognitive Extension. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Clark, A. and Chalmers, D. 1998. The extended mind. Analysis 58.1: 7-19 
Crane, T. 1998. Intentionality as the mark of the mental.  In A. O'Hear (ed.), 
Contemporary Issues in the Philosophy of Mind. Royal Institute of 
Philosophy Supplement (No. 43). Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.  
Crisafi, A. and Gallagher, S. 2009. Hegel and the extended mind. Artificial Intelligence & 
Society. E‐publication ahead of print., November 2009. DOI 
10.1007/s00146-009-0239-9 
De Jaegher, H. Di Paolo, E. and Gallagher, S. (in press). Can social interaction 
constitute social cognition?  Trends in Cognitive Sciences. 
Gallagher, S. and Crisafi, A. 2009. Mental institutions. Topoi 28 (1):  45‐51 
Horgan, T. E.  and  Tienson, J. L. (2002). The intentionality of phenomenology 
and  the  phenomenology  of  intentionality.  In  D.  J.  Chalmers  (ed.), 
Philosophy of Mind: Classical and Contemporary Readings. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Maguire, E. A., Gadian, D. G., Johnsrude, I. S., Good, C. D., Ashburner, J. 
Frackowiak, R. S. and Frith, C. D. 2000. Navigation-related structural change 
in the hippocampi of taxi drivers. PNAS  97 (8): 4398-4403. 
Menary, R. 2009. Intentionality, cognitive integration, and the continuity thesis. 
Topoi 28: 31-43. 
Rolands, M. 2009. The extended mind. Zygon 44 (3): 628‐41 
Rupert,  R.  2009.  Cognitive  Systems  and  the  Extended  Mind.  New  York: 
Oxford University Press.  
Shapiro, L. (in press). Review of Fred Adams and Ken Aizawa, The Bounds of 
Cognition  (Malden,  MA:  Blackwell,  2008).    Phenomenology  and  the 
Cognitive Sciences. 
Wheeler, M. 2006. Minds, things and materiality.  Conference presentation: 
The  Cognitive  Life  of  Things:  Recasting  the  boundaries  of  the  mind 
(Cambridge University). Forthcoming in C Renfrew and L Malafouris (eds.) 
The  Cognitive  Life  of  Things.  McDonald  Institute  Publications,  McDonald 
Institute for Archaelogical Research, Cambridge. 

