Shaun Gallagher
The Practice of Mind
Theory, Simulation or Primary Interaction?
1
Theory of mind explanations of how we know other minds are limited in several ways.
First, they construe intersubjective relations too narrowly in terms of the specialized
cognitive abilities of explaining and predicting another person's mental states and
behaviours. Second, they sometimes draw conclusions about second-person interac-
tion from experiments designed to test third-person observation of another's behav-
iour. As a result, the larger claims that are sometimes made for theory of mind,
namely that theory of mind is our primary and pervasive means for understanding
other persons, go beyond both the phenomenological and the scientific evidence. I
argue that the interpretation of 'primary intersubjectivity' as merely precursory to the-
ory of mind is inadequate. Rather, primary intersubjectivity, understood as a set of
embodied practices and capabilities, is not only primary in a developmental sense, but
is the primary way we continue to understand others in second-person interactions.
In psychology, philosophy of mind and, more recently, in the neurosciences, studies of
how one person understands and interrelates with another person have been conducted
under the heading of 'theory of mind'. Discussions of theory of mind are dominated by
two main approaches: theory theory and simulation theory. The major tenets of theory
theory are based on well-designed scientific experiments that show that children
develop an understanding of other minds around the age of four. One version of theory
theory claims that this understanding is based on an innately specified, domain specific
mechanism designed for 'reading' other minds (Baron-Cohen, 1995; Leslie, 1991). An
alternative version claims that the child attains this ability through a course of develop-
ment in which the child tests and learns from the social environment (Gopnik and
Meltzoff, 1997). Common to both versions of theory theory is the idea that children
attain their understanding of other minds by implicitly employing a theoretical stance.
This stance involves postulating the existence of mental states in others and using such
postulations to explain and predict another person's behaviour. In the earliest level of
development, the four- to five-year-old child's theory of mind involves 'first-order
Journal of Consciousness Studies, 8, No. 5-7, 2001, pp. 83-108
[1] My thanks to an anonymous referee for constructive remarks on a previous version of this paper. I have
also benefited from discussions following presentations of this material at York University in Toronto
and at the British Society for Phenomenology meeting at Oxford University.

belief attribution' in which she distinguishes her own belief from someone else's belief.
The next level involves 'second-order belief attribution', the ability to 'think about
another person's thoughts about a third person's thoughts about an objective event'
(Baron-Cohen, 1989, p. 288). Normal children between the ages of six and seven years
old are able to achieve the second level. The very few autistic children who attain the
earliest level, do so late, and they fail to attain the second level.
The second approach, simulation theory, argues that one does not theorize about the
other person but uses one's own mental experience as an internal model for the other
mind (e.g. Gordon, 1986, 1995a; Goldman, 1989; and Heal 1986, 1998a,b). To under-
stand the other person, I simulate the thoughts or feelings that I would experience if I
were in the situation of the other. I emulate what must be going through the other per-
son's mind; or I create in my own mind pretend beliefs, desires or strategies that I use to
understand the other's behaviour. My source for these simulations is not a theory that I
have. Rather, I have a real model of the mind at my immediate disposal, that is, I have
my own mind, and I can use it to generate and run simulations. I simply run through the
sequence or pattern of behaviour or decision making that I would engage in if I were
faced with the situation in question. I do it 'off line', however. That is, my imaginary
rehearsal does not lead to actualizing the behaviour on my part. Finally, I attribute this
pattern to the other person who is actually in that situation. According to simulation the-
ory, this process may remain non-conscious, with only an awareness of the resulting
understanding or prediction. The process itself, nonetheless, is structured as an internal,
representational simulation (Gordon, 1986).
Across both of these approaches in the theory of mind literature one can distinguish
two specific kinds of claims. First, developmental claims involve the timing and order
of development, the importance and balance of innate mechanisms versus experi-
ence, and so forth. The experimental and neurological evidence used to support such
claims and to justify the theory or simulation interpretations is impressive. It is possi-
ble, however, to raise questions about certain background assumptions that shape the
design of such experiments and the interpretation of data as supportive of certain
aspects of theory of mind. Second, pragmatic claims concern the scope of the appli-
cability of theory of mind.2 Pragmatic claims may be strong or weak. Some theorists
(e.g. Baron-Cohen, 1995; Tooby and Cosmides, 1995; Leslie, 2000) make a very
strong pragmatic claim for theory of mind, namely that, once formed, theory of mind
is our primary and pervasive means for understanding other persons. It is not clear,
however, that the experimental evidence used to support the developmental claims
counts as evidence to support the strong pragmatic claim. Although I will question the
interpretation of the science that informs the developmental claims, in this paper my
main target is the strong pragmatic claim — that ordinarily and for the most part the-
ory of mind forms the basis for our understanding of others.
To make clear what the strong pragmatic claim entails, let me review several of its
various formulations. Recently, in a long conversation with Paul Ricoeur, the
neuroscientist Jean-Pierre Changeux proposed that 'one's relation to others' depends
84
S. GALLAGHER
[2] These specific claims aside, the distinction between developmental aspects and pragmatic aspects of
theory of mind is mirrored in recent research suggesting that the development of theory of mind may
depend on normal language development (Astington and Jenkins, 1999), but that near perfect perfor-
mance on theory of mind tasks does not depend on normal language functioning (Varley and Siegal,
2000).

on a 'cognitive device' that allows for the representation of the other's mental states,
'their sufferings, plans of action, [and] intentions'. He specifically cites experiments
that support the concept of a theory of mind, and he maintains that it is just this type of
mechanism that allows humans to acquire a system of moral values and aesthetic
preferences (Changeux and Ricoeur, 2000, pp. 154-7). Two important researchers of
this cognitive mechanism, Tooby and Cosmides (1995), suggest that 'humans every-
where interpret the behavior of others in . . . mentalistic terms because we all come
equipped with a "theory of mind" module (ToMM) that is compelled to interpret oth-
ers this way, with mentalistic terms as its natural language' (p. xvii). Baron-Cohen
(1995, p. 3) writes: 'it is hard for us to make sense of behavior in any other way than
via the mentalistic (or "intentional") framework'. Quoting Dan Sperber he continues:
' "attribution of mental states is to humans as echolocation is to the bat." It is our natu-
ral way of understanding the social environment' (p. 4). The conclusion proposed by
Uta and Christopher Frith (Frith and Frith, 1999), that mental state attribution plays a
major role in all social interactions, is echoed by Alan Leslie (2000), who defines
ToMM as a specialized component of social intelligence, but claims that it is neces-
sarily involved 'whenever an agent's behavior is attended', for example, 'in conver-
sations and other real-time social interactions' (p. 1236).3
I do not propose simply to criticize the approaches of theory theory and simulation
theory without offering something in their place. The alternative that I will propose is
that the understanding of the other person is primarily neither theoretical nor based on
an internal simulation, but is a form of embodied practice. In explicating this idea I do
not want to deny that we do develop capacities for both theoretical interpretation and
simulation, and that in certain cases we do understand others by enacting just such
theoretical attitudes or simulations. Such instances are rare, however, relative to the
majority of our interactions. Theory theory and simulation theory, at best, explain a
very narrow and specialized set of cognitive processes that we sometimes use to
relate to others (this would constitute a weak pragmatic claim for theory of mind).4
Neither theoretical nor simulation strategies constitute the primary way in which we
relate to, interact with or understand others.
The Embodied Practice of Primary Intersubjectivity
There is good scientific evidence to support the developmental claim that around the
age of four children come to recognize that others are capable of having beliefs differ-
ent from their own. Prior to this, however, the basis for human interaction and for
understanding others has already been laid down by certain embodied practices —
practices that are emotional, sensory-motor, perceptual and nonconceptual. I want to
suggest that these embodied practices constitute our primary access for understand-
ing others, and continue to do so even after we attain theory of mind abilities. Devel-
opment that is specific to theory of mind happens within a wider framework of
interpersonal pragmatics which can be characterized as second-person interactions
with other persons perceived as others.
THE PRACTICE OF MIND
85
[3] Also, Wellman (1993): children at age four begin to 'see people as living their lives within a world of
mental content that determines how they behave in the world of real objects and acts', they construe
'people's real-world actions as inevitably filtered through representations of the world rather than
linked to the world directly' (pp. 31-2).
[4] Concerning a related narrowness of theory theory, see Chandler and Carpendale (1998).

The basic claim that I will defend is that in most intersubjective situations we have
a direct, pragmatic understanding of another person's intentions because their inten-
tions are explicitly expressed in their embodied actions. For the most part this under-
standing does not require us to postulate some belief or desire that is hidden away in
the other person's mind, since what we might reflectively or abstractly call their
belief or desire is expressed directly in their behaviour. The evidence to support this
claim overlaps to some extent with evidence that is sometimes cited for both theory
theory and simulation theory. I will review and reinterpret this evidence first, and then
go on to discuss evidence that suggests that theory theory and simulation theory are
unable to capture the full range of second-person interactions.
Many of those who argue for the theory or simulation approach acknowledge that
for either a theoretical stance or a simulation routine to get off the ground some under-
standing of the context and behaviour of the other person must be had first; otherwise
I would have nothing to simulate or to theorize about. This suggests that before I can
develop a theory of mind I must already have an understanding of the other and their
experience — including the other as the subject of intentional action. Prior to the pos-
sibility of knowing the other's mind in either a theoretical or simulation mode, one
already requires (a) an understanding of what it means to be an experiencing subject;
(b) an understanding of what it means that certain kinds of entities (but not others) in
the environment are indeed such subjects; and (c) an understanding that in some way
these entities are similar to and in other ways different from oneself. Furthermore, to
form a theory about or to simulate what another person believes or desires, we already
need to have specific pre-theoretical knowledge about how people behave in particu-
lar contexts.
One way to summarize these pre-theoretical conditions is to say, following a for-
mulation suggested by Bruner and Kalmar (1998) concerning our understanding of
the self, that the understanding of others in terms of their mental states requires a
'massively hermeneutic' background. This suggests that there is much going on in
our understanding of others, in excess of and prior to the acquisition of theoretical
and/or simulation capabilities. How do we get this background understanding? Some
theorists answer this question by pointing to capabilities in infants and young chil-
dren that they consider 'precursors' of theory of mind (Baron-Cohen, 1995; Gopnik
and Meltzoff, 1997; Meltzoff, 1995; Meltzoff and Prinz, 2001; Nadel and
Butterworth, 1999). In contrast, I interpret these capabilities as clues for an alterna-
tive approach to the issue of how we understand other people.
Pre-theoretical (non-conceptual) capabilities for understanding others already
exist in very young children. Children, prior to the age of three, already have a sense
of what it means to be an experiencing subject; that certain kinds of entities (but not
others) in the environment are indeed such subjects; and that in some way these enti-
ties are similar to and in other ways different from themselves. This sense of others is
already implicit, at least in a primitive way, in the behaviour of the newborn. We see
evidence for it in instances of neonate imitation, which depends not only on a distinc-
tion between self and non-self, and a proprioceptive sense of one's own body, but the
recognition that the other is in fact of the same sort as oneself (Bermúdez, 1996;
Gallagher, 1996; Gallagher and Meltzoff, 1996). Infants are able to distinguish
between inanimate objects and people (agents), and can respond in a distinctive way
to human faces, that is, in a way that they do not respond to other objects (see
86
S. GALLAGHER

Legerstee, 1991; Johnson, 2000; Johnson et al., 1998). Experiments by Meltzoff and
Moore (1977, 1994) demonstrate that from birth the action of the infant and the per-
ceived action of the other person are coded in the same 'language', a cross-modal sys-
tem that is directly attuned to the actions and gestures of other humans. In the case of
imitated facial gestures, one does not require an intermediate theory or simulation to
translate between one's proprioceptive experience of one's face and the visual per-
ception of the other's face. The translation is already accomplished at the level of an
innate body schema that integrates sensory and motor systems (Gallagher and
Meltzoff, 1996). There is, in this case, a common bodily intentionality that is shared
across the perceiving subject and the perceived other. As Gopnik and Meltzoff indi-
cate, 'we innately map the visually perceived motions of others onto our own kines-
thetic sensations' (1997, p. 129).
Should we interpret this intermodal and intersubjective mapping as a primitive
form of theorizing or 'an initial theory of action'? Gopnik and Meltzoff (1997) think
so. They suggest that infants form a 'plan', an internal representation of what they
will do, and then they 'recognize the relationship between their plan to produce the
action and the action they perceive in others' (p. 130). On this view, this is the begin-
ning of an inference-like operation that is eventually promoted into a theoretical atti-
tude. But is the motor plan equivalent to a mental state? They suggest it is, although
not a very sophisticated mental state. But if, in this case, we ask what a mental state is,
it seems to be nothing other than a certain disposition of the body to act intentionally,
plus the phenomenal sense of what it is like to do the action. Certainly it does not have
the status of an ideational event that intervenes to mediate vision and proprioception.
Intermodal experience is characterized as phenomenologically transparent. That is,
the sensory-motor process does not require an internal copy that the infant consults in
order to know what to do. Although neonates do in fact perfect their imitative actions
(improving the match between their gesture and the perceived gesture — therefore
indicating that they register the difference between themselves and the other), they
need no internal plan to consult since they have a visual model right in front of them,
namely the face of the other, as well as a proprioceptive model, namely the gesture
that is taking shape on their own face. Even in those cases where the infant has cause
to remember the presented gesture in order to imitate it after a delay (see Meltzoff and
Moore, 1994), it is difficult to construe a sensory-motor memory as a theory of action.
Accordingly, the body schema does not function as an 'abstract representation'
(Gopnik and Meltzoff, 1997, p. 133). If, as Meltzoff himself proposes, the body
schema is an innate system designed for motor control, it seems more appropriate to
understand it as a set of pragmatic (action oriented) capabilities embodied in the
developing nervous system (see Gallagher et al., 1998). In the human infant this sys-
tem accounts for the possibility of recognizing and imitating other humans.
To the capabilities implicit in neonate imitation we need to add a number of other
early interactive capabilities that constitute what Trevarthen (1979) has called 'pri-
mary intersubjectivity'. Although these aspects of behaviour are sometimes enlisted
in the cause of theory theory (see Baron-Cohen, 1995, p. 55; Gopnik and Meltzoff,
1997, p. 131), it is quite possible to understand them as supporting a more immediate,
less theoretical (non-mentalistic) mode of interaction. Baron-Cohen (1995), for
example, proposes two mechanisms as necessary, but not sufficient, components of a
theory of mind mechanism. The first he terms the 'intentionality detector' (ID). He
THE PRACTICE OF MIND
87

considers this to be an innate capability that allows the infant to read 'mental states in
behaviour' (p. 32). The ID allows the infant to interpret (notably without the interven-
tion of theory or simulation) bodily movement as goal-directed intentional move-
ment. In effect, the infant is capable of perceiving other persons as agents. On the one
hand, this mechanism may not be specific enough to limit the attribution of agency to
just humans (see Scholl and Tremoulet, 2000). On the other hand, combined with
other capabilities, such as imitation of human gestures and eye-tracking (see below),
ID is quickly honed to serve intersubjective interpretation. The interpretation fos-
tered by ID, however, does not require advanced cognitive abilities. It is perceptual
and, as Scholl and Tremoulet suggest, 'fast, automatic, irresistible and highly
stimulus-driven' (p. 299).
Evidence for early, non-mentalistic interpretation of the intentional actions of oth-
ers can be found in numerous studies. Baldwin and colleagues have shown that
infants at ten to eleven months are able to parse some kinds of continuous action
according to intentional boundaries (Baldwin and Baird, 2001; Baldwin et al., in
press). Eighteen-month-old children can comprehend what another person intends to
do. They are able to re-enact to completion the goal-directed behaviour that an
observed subject does not complete (Meltzoff, 1995; Meltzoff and Brooks, in press).
Quite obviously ID provides an understanding of what an intentional state is; in the
first place, another's intentional state is simply the other's action or the state of a per-
ceived body. This understanding is non-mentalistic in the same sense that our under-
standing of our own intentional actions is non-mentalistic. To be precise, we do not
interpret our own action on either an abstract, physiological level ('I am activating a
certain group of muscles'), or in terms of a mentalistic performance ('I believe P, so I
will do X'). Rather, quite naturally, we understand our own actions on the highest
pragmatic level possible (see e.g. Jeannerod, 1997; Gallagher and Marcel, 1999). For
example, if, as I reach for a cup, someone asks me what I am doing, I do not say, ordi-
narily, 'I am reaching for a cup'; rather I say, 'I'm taking a drink'. I tend to understand
my actions just at that pragmatic, intentional (goal-oriented) level, ignoring possible
sub-personal or lower-level descriptions, and also ignoring ideational or mentalistic
interpretations, e.g. 'What are you doing?' 'I'm acting on a belief (desire) that I am
thirsty'. Likewise, the interpretation of the actions of others occurs at that same prag-
matic (intentional) level. We interpret their actions in terms of their goals and inten-
tions set in contextualized situations, rather than abstractly in terms of either their
muscular performance or their beliefs.5
88
S. GALLAGHER
[5] Do our interpretations of such actions depend on inference? Baldwin and Baird (2001) argue that infer-
ence is required to sort out which one of many possible interpretations is correct. They cite Searle's
example.
If I am going for a walk to Hyde Park, there are any number of things that are happening in the
course of my walk, but their descriptions do not describe my intentional actions, because in
acting what I am doing depends in large part on what I think I am doing. So for example, I am
also moving in the general direction of Patagonia, shaking the hair on my head up and down,
wearing out my shoes and moving a lot of air molecules. However, none of these other
descriptions seems to get at what is essential about this action, as the action it is. (Searle,
1984, p. 58)
According to Baldwin and Baird, to work out the right interpretation of Searle's action we need
much more information about him and human behaviour, and on that basis we proceed to make an
inferential judgment about his intentions. But clearly, given the situation, Patagonia, bouncing hair

The second mechanism proposed by Baron-Cohen is what he terms the
'eye-direction detector' (EDD). EDD allows the infant to recognize where another
person is looking. Obviously, this mechanism is more specific than ID since it is
linked to the perception of eyes and faces. It allows the infant to see (1) that the other
person is looking in a certain direction and (2) that the other person sees what she is
looking at. Does EDD involve an inference in moving from step (1) to step (2)?
Baron-Cohen suggests that an inference is necessary to understand that the other per-
son actually sees what she is looking at. Specifically, he points out that the infant
experiences its own vision as contingent on opening versus closing its eyes. His sug-
gestion is more in line with simulation theory: 'from very early on, infants presum-
ably distinguish seeing from not-seeing . . . Although this knowledge is initially based
on the infant's own experience, it could be generalized to an Agent by analogy with
the Self' (Baron-Cohen, 1995, p. 43). But, one could ask, how does seeing differ from
looking? Of course by virtue of experience we may come to discover that someone
can be looking in a certain direction and not seeing something that is located in that
direction. But that would seem to be something that we learn rather than a default
mode of EDD. On the face of it, that is, at a primary (default) level of experience,
there does not seem to be an extra step between looking at something and seeing it.6
Baron-Cohen makes it clear that ID and EDD separately or together are sufficient
to enable the child to recognize dyadic relations between the other and the self, or
between the other and the world. The child can understand that the other person wants
food or intends to open the door, that the other can see him (the child) or is looking at
the door. These are basic intentional relations. Of course children do not simply
observe others, they interact with others, and in doing so they develop a further capa-
bility which Baron-Cohen terms the 'shared attention mechanism' (SAM). Behaviour
representative of joint attention begins to develop around nine to fourteen months.
The child alternates between monitoring the gaze of the other and what the other is
gazing at, checking to verify that they are continuing to look at the same thing. The
child also learns to point at around this same time. Phillips, Baron-Cohen and Rutter
(1992) show that infants between nine and eighteen months look to the eyes of the
other person to help interpret the meaning of an ambiguous event. In such interac-
tions, well before the development of a theory of mind mechanism, the child looks to
the body and the expressive movement of the other to discern the intention of the per-
son or to find the meaning of some object. In this kind of second-person interaction
two-year-olds are even capable of recognizing pretend behaviour, for example the
mother pretending the banana is a telephone (Leslie, 1994).
THE PRACTICE OF MIND
89
and shoe-wear as such, and molecular movement, simply do not enter into my interpretation, unless I
start making abstract, theoretical inferences. Rather, if I see John Searle walking toward Hyde Park,
I'm likely to say, 'There's John Searle out for a walk.' Or, 'That guy is heading for the park.' The other
interpretations simply do not come up, unless I start making large and abstract inferences. Since I don't
see John Searle every day, I may in fact start to wonder what his further intentions are — is he going to
philosophize in the park? But if I were to seriously pursue this question I would have to take action —
follow him, stop and ask him, ask someone else who might know, etc. Without such action my infer-
ences would be blind.
[6] See Leslie and Frith (1988). Their discussion of seeing and not seeing in terms of a geometrical-causal
line of sight suggests that the default does not involve a distinction between seeing and looking.
Baron-Cohen (1995), who carefully provides evidence for the other aspects of EDD, does not provide
evidence for there being an inference between looking and seeing.

There are many more intention-signalling behaviours that infants and young chil-
dren are capable of perceiving. In addition to the eyes, it is likely that various move-
ments of the head, the mouth, the hands, and more general body movements are
perceived as meaningful or goal-directed. Such perceptions are important for a
non-mentalistic (pre-theoretical) understanding of the intentions and dispositions of
other persons as well as for social reinforcement (see review by Allison, Puce and
McCarthy, 2000), and they are operative by the end of the first year (Baldwin, 1993;
Johnson, 2000; Johnson et al., 1998). In effect, this kind of perception-based under-
standing is a form of body-reading rather than mind-reading. In seeing the actions and
expressive movements of the other person one already sees their meaning; no infer-
ence to a hidden set of mental states (beliefs, desires, etc.) is necessary.
There is also evidence for affective and temporal coordination between the ges-
tures and expressions of the infant and those of the other persons with whom they
interact. Infants 'vocalize and gesture in a way that seems "tuned" [affectively and
temporally] to the vocalizations and gestures of the other person' (Gopnik and
Meltzoff, 1997, p. 131). At five to seven months infants are able to detect correspon-
dences between visual and auditory information that specify the expression of emo-
tions (Walker, 1982). Importantly, the perception of emotion in the movement of
others is a perception of an embodied comportment, rather than a theory or simulation
of an emotional state. Moore, Hobson and Lee (1997) have demonstrated the emo-
tional nature of human movement using actors with point-lights attached to various
body joints.7 Non-autistic subjects view the abstractly outlined but clearly embodied
movement of the actors in a darkened room and are able to identify the emotion that is
being represented. The emotional states of others are not, in primary experience,
mental attributes that we have to infer. One perceives the emotion in the movement
and expression of the other's body.8
Given the capabilities that are available under the title of primary intersubjectivity,
I propose what in relation to theory theory or simulation theory is a revised, and in
some sense enhanced or extended developmental claim. Before we are in a position to
form a theory about or to simulate what the other person believes or desires, we
already have specific pre-theoretical knowledge about how people behave in partic-
ular contexts. We are able to get this kind of knowledge precisely through the vari-
ous capabilities that characterize primary intersubjectivity, including imitation,
intentionality detection, eye-tracking, the perception of intentional or goal-related
movements, and the perception of meaning and emotion in movement and posture.
This kind of knowledge, which is the 'massively hermeneutic' background required
for the more conceptual accomplishments of mentalistic interpretation, derives from
embodied practices in second-person interactions with others. As a result, before we
are in a position to theorize, simulate, explain or predict mental states in others, we
90
S. GALLAGHER
[7] As early as five months of age infants show preferential attentiveness to human shape and movement
in such displays (Bertenthal, Proffitt and Cutting, 1984). The subjects in Moore, Hobson and Lee
(1997) were older children classified as normal, autistic and non-autistic mentally retarded. The results
demonstrated that the autistic children had relatively more difficulty in recognizing (or simply failed to
recognize) emotional attitudes.
[8] Hobson (1993) provides a strong argument along this line. He cites Merleau-Ponty (1994) who notes
the 'simple fact that I live in the facial expressions of the other, as I feel him living in mine' (p. 146).
Also see Cole (1998, 1999) on the importance of the face in such contexts.

are already in a position to interact with and to understand others in terms of their ges-
tures, intentions and emotions, and in terms of what they see, what they do or pretend
to do with objects, and how they act toward ourselves and others.
I also want to argue for the following pragmatic claim. Primary, embodied inter-
subjectivity is not primary simply in developmental terms. Rather it remains primary
across all face-to-face intersubjective experiences, and it subtends the occasional and
secondary intersubjective practices of explaining or predicting what other people
believe, desire or intend in the practice of their own minds.
What Can Phenomenology Show?
There are significant differences between theory theorists and simulation theorists, as
well as between nativist and non-nativist accounts of theory theory. There are also
disagreements among both simulationists and theory theorists on the question of
implicit versus explicit processes. I do not mean to simply brush over these differ-
ences. They will motivate a variety of qualifications on the points that I will outline
here. The main qualification is that all of the following critical points do not apply to
every representative of these richly diverse positions. Notwithstanding this qualifica-
tion, the following points do apply to a large part of the literature on theory of mind.
A common and basic assumption implicit to theory of mind accounts is that to
know another person is to know that person's mind, and this means to know their
beliefs, desires or intentional states. I will refer to this as the mentalistic supposition.
Furthermore, theory of mind suggests that we use our knowledge of another person's
mind to explain or predict the other person's behaviour. Since we have no direct
access to another person's intentional states, we either postulate what their beliefs or
desires are on the basis of a set of causal-explanatory laws (theory theory) or we pro-
ject the results of certain simulation routines. There is no requirement that such theo-
rizing or simulating be conscious or explicit. We may learn to engage in such
interpretation to the point that it becomes habitual and transparent.
The mentalistic supposition implies that an explicit recognition of another person's
beliefs, desires or intentional states is clearly conceptual; and that an implicit recogni-
tion is informed by such conceptual knowledge. One requires a concept of belief or
desire before one can attribute such things to another person. This conceptual recog-
nition involves an element of abstractness. To discover a belief as an intentional state
even in myself requires that I take up a second-order reflective stance and recognize
that my cognitive action can be classified as a belief. Indeed, to explicitly recognize
that I myself 'have a mind' is already something of a theoretical postulate. This is not
to deny that I might have something like a direct access to my own experience, or that
this experience can be characterized as self-conscious. I can easily say, for example,
'I feel very good about planning my trip.' But to say that this experience of feeling
good is in fact a feeling, and that this feeling depends on a belief that I will actually
take the trip, requires something like a reflective detachment from my phenomenal
experience, and the positing of a feeling (or belief) as a feeling (as a belief). It would
involve a further postulation that such feelings and beliefs are in some fashion part of
what it means to have a mind. This kind of metacognitive theorizing is always pos-
sible for the adult human, but for the most part I would suggest that, in practice, this is
THE PRACTICE OF MIND
91

not the way we think of ourselves — unless we are practising philosophical medita-
tions of the sort Descartes practised.
Perhaps the fact that we have something like a direct access to our own experience
does not require that to know our own mind we take a conceptual, abstract, theoretical
attitude toward our own experience. Rather, for theory theory, the idea (the pragmatic
claim) is that to understand the other person, to whom we have no direct access, we take
just such a theoretical attitude. In order to understand that the other person feels very
good about planning her trip, I can only hypothesize that she has a certain set of feelings
and beliefs that normally go along with a situation like that. One's theory depends upon
and is complicated, however, by what one knows of such situations. Some people do
not have good feelings about planning trips; they actually get stressed out. Sometimes
they may even say 'I don't believe that I am actually going!' Clearly if I am to take a
theoretical stance toward what the other person is experiencing, I need to interpret her
behaviour on the basis of what I see and hear, and on the basis of what I know of such
things. What I know of such things, however, is not easily summarized. Part of what I
know includes the kind of pre-theoretical knowledge that I get through capacities that
belong to primary intersubjectivity, as described above. If I were to formalize a rule that
guided my theoretical stance, it would probably include aspects of pre-theoretical
knowledge. Consider the following formulation. 'When someone is planning a trip and
she says something like "I don't believe that I am actually going," with intonations that
signal exasperation, she really means that she does believe that she is going and she is
not enjoying the planning process.' An exasperated intonation, however, is something
that I learn about at the level of primary intersubjectivity.
Do we react to the exasperation in a person's voice by appealing (implicitly or
explicitly) to a theory? It seems possible to describe it in this way in cases where the
situation is not typical, or when, perhaps, the behaviour of the other person is out of
character or out of context, or when we don't know the person, or in cases where we
are talking with someone else about a third person. When we do not know the person
we may need to run through certain possibilities and perhaps engage in a process of
interpretation from a distance, much as a historian might attempt to understand a his-
torical figure — forming a hypothesis on the basis of evidence.9 Even in cases where
we know (or think we know) a person very well, we may express puzzlement about
their behaviour. In discussing a friend's behaviour with someone who doesn't know
her as well, we may come to devise a theory about why she is acting in a certain way.
It seems very possible to describe such cases in terms of a theory of mind. Is this a
good description of our ordinary interactions with others?
Simulation theory claims that it is not. It is not clear that we represent, explicitly or
implicitly, the sorts of rules (causal-explanatory laws) that would summarize what
we know of human situations and that would operate as the bases for a theoretical
understanding of the other person. Indeed, we find it difficult even to formulate such
rules, and this seems odd if we actually use them all the time (Goldman, 1989). Further-
more, at least on the developmental version of theory theory, there is no way to
account for the fact that children as young as three or four years putatively develop
92
S. GALLAGHER
[9] Davies and Stone (1998) consider certain limitations of historical analysis based on simulation, citing
Collingwood's claim that historical understanding can be achieved by the re-enactment of the histori-
cal character's thought.

the very same theory (a common folk psychology), when theory formation in general
usually leads to a diversification of theory (Carruthers, 1996; Goldman, 1989).
Do we, then, simulate the other person's belief? Again, this process itself may
remain implicit, with only an awareness of the resulting prediction. The process
itself, nonetheless, is structured as an internal, representational simulation (Gordon,
1986). The simulation model is closer than theory theory to what I described above as
an embodied practice of primary intersubjectivity. It involves something more like a
practiced skill than a theoretical stance. Indeed, there is some suggestion that the
result of simulation is not so much a mental model of the other's mind, but a motor
adjustment in my own system that allows me insight into the other person's behaviour
(Gordon, unpublished MS, cited in Stich and Nichols, 1992; Grezes and Decety,
2001). On the other hand, various descriptions of simulation invoke the idea of pre-
dicting behaviour on the basis of hypothetical beliefs and desires that are fed into a
cognitive decision-making system (see Carruthers (1996) for a description of an
approach that combines theory and simulation along this line). The result of this pro-
cess is to project or attribute relevant intentional states to the mind of the other person.
Like theory theory, simulation theory understands the other person as a collection of
such mental states, and often understands the simulation itself as a mental state.
In the situation of talking with someone else about a third person, it seems possible
to describe our attitude toward the person under discussion as theoretical or as involv-
ing a simulation of the other person's mental states. But does the same description
capture the dynamics of our interaction with our interlocutor? That is, in a second-
person conversational situation, although we may indeed tacitly follow certain rules
of conversation, our process of interpretation does not seem to involve a detached or
abstract, third-person quest for causal explanation. Nor does it seem to be a the-
ory-driven interpretation that takes the other person's words as evidence for a mental
state standing behind what he has just said. Even if we are trying to read between the
lines and we reach the conclusion that the person we are conversing with believes the
wrong thing concerning the other person, our understanding of this is poorly
described as resulting from formulating a theoretical hypothesis or running a simula-
tion routine about what he believes. We do not posit a theoretical entity called a belief
and attribute it to him. We do not interact with him by conceiving of his mind as a set
of cogitationes closed up in immanence (Merleau-Ponty, 1962, p. 353).
Both theory theory and simulation theory conceive of communicative interaction
between two people as a process that takes place between two Cartesian minds. It
assumes that one's understanding involves a retreat into a realm of theoria or
simulacra, into a set of internal mental operations that come to be expressed
(externalized) in speech, gesture or interaction. If, in contrast, we think of communi-
cative interaction as being accomplished in the very action of communication, in the
speech, gesture and interaction itself,10 then the idea that the understanding of another
person involves an attempt to theorize about an unseen belief, or to mind-read, is
problematic.
THE PRACTICE OF MIND
93
[10] Here I follow Merleau-Ponty (1962), who conceives of thought as being accomplished in speech. In
contrast, a leading theorist of mind, Baron-Cohen (1995), endorses a traditional Augustinian view of
language: 'language functions principally as a "printout" of the contents of the mind' (p. 29). It follows
that 'in decoding speech we go way beyond the words we hear or read, to hypothesize about the
speaker's mental states' (p. 27).

This phenomenologically based criticism is subject to an objection that is typically
raised at this point. Is an appeal to phenomenology in this context justified? Theory
theorists and simulation theorists often claim that the employment of a theory of mind
or simulation routine is unconscious and that what we experience or seemingly expe-
rience is not a good guide for what is really going on in such cases (e.g. Goldman and
Gallese, 2000). On this account we should think of the theory or simulation routine as
somehow programmed into the very structure of our experience of others. If that is the
case and our engagement in a theory or simulation procedure is not always explicit or
conscious does this mean that our phenomenology is simply wrong? Or does it mean
rather that what we capture in phenomenological reflection is something else?
In principle, phenomenology would not be able to say whether a subpersonal cog-
nitive routine is operative; but it would be able to say whether my normal experience
of the other person is best characterized as explanation and prediction, the kind of
interpretations that both theory theory and simulation theory posit. I suggest that what
phenomenology tells us is that explanation and prediction are specialized and rela-
tively rare modes of understanding others, and that something like evaluative under-
standing about what someone means or about how I should respond in any particular
situation best characterize most of our interactions. The kind of phenomenology I
have in mind here is close to a Heideggerian existential phenomenology. It tells us
that our primary and usual way of being in the world is pragmatic (characterized by
action, involvement and interaction based on environmental and contextual factors),
rather than mentalistic or conceptual (characterized as explanation or prediction
based on mental contents).11
Both theory theory and simulation theory construe our encounter with other people
in terms of explaining or predicting the other's beliefs, desires and behaviours. Phe-
nomenology cannot tell us whether our response to the exasperation in a person's
voice involves an implicit (sub-conscious) theory or pretend belief. But a careful and
methodical phenomenology12 should be able to tell us whether, when we hear the
exasperated voice, our usual response involves formulating an explanation or predict-
ing what the person will do next? Our encounters with others are in fact not normally
occasions for theorizing or simulating if such nonconscious procedures are cashed
out phenomenologically as explaining or predicting on the basis of postulated men-
tal states. Rather, pragmatic interaction and evaluative understanding take up most
of our effort. Only when second-person pragmatic interactions or our evaluative
94
S. GALLAGHER
[11] Heidegger's famous description of the carpenter's hammer is a relevant example. For the most part the
carpenter's experience of the hammer is a pragmatic one. She hammers without thinking of the ham-
mer as an object, using it rather as an extension of her body. Her relationship to it is not theoretical or
conceptual, but fully caught up in a complex set of pragmatic activities. Only when something goes
wrong with the hammering, or when the hammer breaks, does she regard the hammer as an object and
as something to be explained. A theory of the hammer is experientially secondary to its use
(Heidegger, 1968). The suggestion is not that one's relation to another person is equivalent to one's
relation to equipment but that, as in the case of the hammer, one's relation to others is not primarily the-
oretical or conceptual, but is first of all an interactive one.
[12] In contrast to non-methodical introspection. This qualification is meant to head off the standard reply
that introspective reports are notoriously suspect guides to what subjects are doing even at the con-
scious level, since they are infected (as it were) by what one of my referee's called 'local politics (cur-
rently popular psychological views, tried and true folk-notions, and so forth and so on)'. In the method
of a phenomenological reduction of the sort practised by Husserl, care is taken to systematically elimi-
nate such prejudices.

attempts to understand break down do we resort to the more specialized practices of
third-person explanation and prediction.
The distinction between explanation and evaluation is an important one to make in
this context.13 In our everyday and ordinary encounters we rarely look for causal-
mentalistic explanations for people's actions. Rather than being folk psychological,
in the sense of involving a folk theory, our encounters are primarily occasions for
interactions and evaluations. My action, or the action of another, may be motivated in
part by the fact that the situation is just such that this is the action that is called for. In
such cases, an action is not caused by a well-formed mental state, but is motivated by
some aspect of the situation, as I experience and evaluate it.
One way to understand what I mean by evaluation is to reframe a distinction made
by Perner (1991) in his explication of theory theory. He distinguishes between 'situa-
tion theory', employed by three-year-olds prior to attaining a theory of mind, and
'representational theory' or theory of mind. According to Perner, three-year-olds
employ some aspect of the environment plus some understanding of desire, but are
unable to comprehend the concept of the other's belief. One should note, however,
that the environment, or the situation, is not something that the child, or the adult,
objectively confronts as an outside observer. The notion of situation should be under-
stood to include the experiencing subject (that is, oneself) and the action of that sub-
ject. Our involvement in a situation is not as a third-person observer developing a
situation theory, as if we were not part of the situation ourselves. Our interaction with
another human being is not equivalent to a detached observation (or explanation) of
what that person is doing. The notion of evaluation signifies an embedded cognitive
practice that relies on those pre-theoretical embodied capabilities that three-year-olds
have already developed to understand intersubjective situations. Even to the extent
that evaluation becomes reflective, it is more like an embedded reflection on possible
actions (Gallagher and Marcel, 1999) than a detached consideration of mental states.
Rather than drawing up a theory about a particular situation, or taking an objective,
observational stance toward the other person, we have the capacity for measuring it
up in pragmatic terms. This capacity does not disappear when the child reaches the
age of four, but is rather enhanced by further experience.14
Consider the following example that Baron-Cohen (1995, p. 28) cites from Pinker
(1994):
THE PRACTICE OF MIND
95
[13] See (Jacobson, 2000). What Jacobson says of eliminative materialism and more generally of function-
alism, can equally be said of theory theory and simulation theory: 'each take the defining role of
folk-psychological terms to be in causal discourse while it is instead in significant part in evaluative
discourse'. On the relation between theory and explanation, see Schwitzgebel (1999a).
[14] Perner (1991) goes on to suggest that theory of mind doesn't actually replace situation theory. It simply
amends it to cover problem cases. Even as adults 'we stay situation theorists at heart. We resort to a rep-
resentational theory only when we need to.' Barresi and Moore (1996) also argue that more primary
processes of social understanding are not replaced by the more mentalistic ones, but that the more pri-
mary ones continue to function. I disagree with Gordon (1995b) who, in a gloss on Perner, suggests
that what passes as situation theory in adult behaviour is really a sophistication in simulating and attrib-
uting beliefs and intentions which becomes manifest only when there is a problem. The sophistication
of our simulation abilities, he contends, simply makes it seem as if we are not simulating. Gordon does
suggest that prior to the development of simulation abilities, the mental, in some sense, 'is already "out
there" in the environment, though not yet conceptualized as mental'. My point is that a good part of the
mental does not end up hidden away. It becomes embedded in our embodied and communicative
practices.

Woman: I'm leaving you.
Man:
Who is he?
Overhearing this bit of discussion, the task, according to Baron-Cohen, is to explain
why the man utters this phrase. The explanation: 'the man must have thought [formed
a belief] that the woman was leaving him for another man'. A certain thought or belief
causes the man to say what he says. What causes the thought? Perhaps some cognitive
schema that associates this scenario with the influence of a third party. If indeed an
explanation is needed this may be a good folk-psychological one, but the question to
start with is whether, upon overhearing this bit of conversation, we would be moti-
vated to explain it rather than to comprehend it in an evaluative way. From our per-
spective, as interlopers who are listening in, the thought expressed in the man's words
does not have the status of a belief in his head; the thought is already given to us in the
words and we have no need to posit a belief over and above them. Would we not
already have a pre-theoretical understanding of what was meant, and instead of for-
mulating an explanation would we not be taking some stance or action — choosing up
sides or perhaps moving as far away as we could to give the couple privacy? In reality,
the man himself may have no such discrete belief. He may have blurted out the ques-
tion as a question that had never before dawned on him, because he saw something
like shame or defiance in the woman's eyes.
Theory of mind conceptualizes beliefs and other intentional states as discretely
representational. There are good reasons, however, to view beliefs as dispositions
that are sometimes ambiguous even from the perspective of the believer. To have a
belief is not to have an all-or-nothing mental representation, but to have some more or
less complete set of dispositions to act and to experience in certain ways. Dispositions
are actualized, not only in overt behaviour, including verbal behaviour, but also in
phenomenal experience.15 Thus, given a particular context, one may have a disposi-
tion to feel upset or to perceive things as grating, depending on a variety of circum-
stances. For our understanding of other people, I am suggesting that we rarely need to
go beyond contextualized overt behaviours (actions, gestures, speech-acts, etc.). We
are rarely required to postulate an idealized and abstract mental belief standing
behind these behaviours in order to grasp the disposition that is overtly constituted
and expressed in the contextualized behaviour. In certain contextualized interaction I
need go no further than the person's gestures or emotional expressions to gain my
understanding of how it is with that person.
Even if explaining and predicting another person's intentional states and behav-
iours are structured as theories or simulations, a more basic question is whether our
ordinary attempts to understand other people are best characterized as explanations
and predictions. Those who defend theory of mind might reply that even if our rela-
tions with others phenomenologically seem to be pragmatically interactive, they are,
in fact, implicitly matters of theorizing or simulating. Even if we are aware of only
direct evaluative responses, such responses may be the result of busy sub-personal
96
S. GALLAGHER
[15] This view, a 'phenomenal, dispositional account of belief' (Schwitzgebel, in press), clearly does not
involve a reductionist type of behaviourism, as one finds in the usual interpretation of Ryle (1949).
Schwitzgebel's excellent account, framed in a purely analytic exposition, is quite consistent with
phenomenological accounts found in theorists like Merleau-Ponty. For its implications in the develop-
mental context see Schwitzgebel (1999b)

mechanisms that have the structure of theory or simulation. In this case, controlled
experimentation (rather than phenomenology) is the only way to investigate such
cognitive mechanisms. Thus, we clearly need to examine the scientific evidence in
support of this claim.
The Science of Other Minds
Both theory theory and simulation theory claim the support of good science. Theory
theory appeals to classic false-belief tests in developmental psychology for its justifi-
cation. Simulation theory has recently received support from neuroscience. If one is
going to challenge either of these approaches, it is important to consider the scientific
evidence and to indicate whether the challenge puts the scientific evidence into ques-
tion, or whether a new theory would be consistent with the established evidence. I can
not review all of the scientific evidence for either of these approaches here, but I will
look at a representative sampling and try to indicate certain limitations in the empiri-
cal data consistent with my remarks in the previous sections.
1.
False-belief experiments
In the 'standard' false-belief task a subject is asked about the thoughts and actions of
another person or character who lacks certain information that the subject has. For
example, the subject knows that a candy box actually contains pencils. Someone else
(this could be a puppet or a real person) enters the room. The question that is posed to
the subject is 'What will the other person say is in the candy box?'. Four-year-olds
generally answer correctly that the other person will think that there are candies in the
box. Three-year-olds are unable to see that the other person may falsely believe that
there are candies in the box. So three-year-olds answer that the other person will say
there are pencils in the box (see e.g. Perner, Leekam and Wimmer, 1987). False belief
tests can be made more or less complicated.
In a series of experiments often sited in support of theory theory, Heinz Wimmer
and Josef Perner (1983) investigated a subject's competence in representing another
person's belief when that belief differs from what the subject knows to be true. In four
experiments children between the ages of three and nine were divided into three
groups: three- to four-year olds, four- to six-year olds, and six- to nine-year olds.
Each child was told stories that involved, first, a cooperative situation and then a com-
petitive situation. For example, a kid named Maxi puts a piece of chocolate in a blue
cupboard and then goes out to play. While he is gone, and without his knowledge, the
chocolate is moved into a green cupboard. In the cooperative version of the story
Maxi, upon returning, cooperates with another character in obtaining the chocolate.
In the competitive version Maxi is in competition with an antagonist. All stories are
told up to the point where the main characters look for the hidden object. At this time,
each subject is asked to indicate (a) where the chocolate actually was located (the
reality question), (b) where Maxi would look for the chocolate (the belief question)
and (c) where Maxi would tell the other character to look.
All age groups were able to answer the reality question correctly. Answers to the
other questions generally varied in relation to the age of the subjects. When asked
where Maxi would look for the object (the belief question) most of the four- to
five-year-olds chose the green cupboard incorrectly. However, most of the six- to
THE PRACTICE OF MIND
97

nine-year-olds chose the blue cupboard, correctly, despite the fact that the object was
really in the green cupboard. When asked, in the competitive version, where Maxi
would say the object was hidden, most of the subjects who answered correctly on the
belief question were able to create a deceitful utterance required for the competitive
versions of the stories. These subjects understood that Maxi would deceive his com-
petitor purposely. Most of the same subjects were also able to create a truthful utter-
ance for the cooperative versions of the stories.
Why were the youngest subjects unable to correctly ascribe a wrong belief to
Maxi? A second experiment was designed to answer this question. The same stories
were used as in the previous experiment, but with several modifications. A memory
question (Do you remember where Maxi put the chocolate?) was asked when the sub-
ject answered incorrectly to the belief question. Also, subjects were reminded of what
Maxi did before he went outside before being asked the belief question. The results
showed an improvement of the five- to six-year-olds in their responses to the belief
question. The three- to four-year-olds were unable to correctly ascribe a wrong belief
even with the modifications.
Wimmer and Perner concluded from these and several other experiments that chil-
dren age six and above are able to cope with representational complexities. Four- to
six-year-old children have the ability to represent wrong beliefs, but are sensitive to
modifications in the task. Few in the three- to four-year-old group are able to repre-
sent wrong beliefs or another person's absence of knowledge. Most children who are
able to represent wrong beliefs are also able to construct deceitful utterances.
Children between the ages of four and six are able to demonstrate inferential skills.
These experiments, and many others based on the same experimental paradigm
(see e.g. Baron-Cohen, Leslie and Frith, 1985) are often cited as evidence for the
development of a theory of mind at around four years of age. As Stich and Nichols
(1992) point out, however, theory theory, as well as simulation theory, are compatible
with but do not necessarily entail the Maxi experiments (see Gordon, 1995b). So
these experiments cannot be used to support one approach over another. Indeed, a
number of authors argue that subjects who fail false-belief tests do not necessarily fail
them because they lack a theory of mind. It may be that the intellectual processing
involved in the testing is simply too complicated.16 Furthermore, the false-belief par-
adigm does not capture all there is to say about children's abilities to understand others.
Bloom and German (2000), who generally support a theory approach, cite various
aspects of primary intersubjectivity as already providing such capabilities prior to age
four. They conclude, rightly, that the false-belief test is 'an ingenious, but very difficult
task that taps one aspect of people's understanding of the minds of others' (p. B30).
98
S. GALLAGHER
[16] Leslie and Thaiss (1992) show that when photographs are used to represent mental states four-year-
olds do worse than their performance on the standard false-belief tests. If it were a matter of picturing
mental states as representations, the four-year-old should do equally well on the photograph test (see
Leslie, 2000). Three-year-olds fail both the photograph tests (in which false beliefs are not at stake)
and the false-belief tests, suggesting not that children have problems with beliefs per se, but with the
complexity of the problems (Bloom and German, 2000). Furthermore, Siegal and Beattie (1991) and
Surian and Leslie (1999) have shown that three-year-olds are capable of passing false-belief tests if the
wording of the questions is modified. This suggests that 'normally developing children's performance
on false-belief problems is limited by processing resources rather than by inability to represent belief
states in others' (Leslie, 2000, p. 1242). Bloom and German (2000) and Barresi and Moore (1996)
present similar arguments.

The fact that these experiments are designed to test one aspect of how people
understand the minds of others is both their strength and their weakness. The experi-
ments clearly show that something new happens at age four, and that what happens is
somewhat consistent with certain assumptions that are shared by both theory theory
and simulation theory. The experiments are designed to test whether children at cer-
tain ages have acquired an ability to explain or predict the behaviour of others. But, as
indicated above, explaining and predicting are very specialized cognitive abilities,
and do not capture the fuller picture of how we understand other people.17
Two other important limitations of false-belief tests in relation to theory of mind
should be pointed out. First, subjects are asked to predict the behaviour of others with
whom they are not interacting. Based on a third-person observation, the child is asked
to predict what the other person will do. Can the results of these experiments be used
to characterize second-person ('I-you') interaction?18 If second-person interaction is
the primary and ordinary way of encountering the other person, can we be certain that
results based on third-person observation can truly characterize our understanding
of others? It is interesting to note that in the three-year-old subject's second-person
interaction with the experimenter, the subject does not seem to have difficulty under-
standing the experimenter in the way that she seems to misunderstand the third person
about whom she is asked. It is not at all clear that how we interact with another person
directly in a second-person relationship can be captured by activities in the category
of third-person observation.
Second, false-belief experiments, like the one conducted by Wimmer and Perner,
are designed to test a conscious, metarepresentational process. That is, in such experi-
ments, the subjects are not only provided with the task of explaining or predicting, but
they are asked to perform these tasks consciously, and in a reflective manner. In con-
trast, many theorists claim that theory of mind mechanisms are sub-personal, operat-
ing below the level of consciousness. In effect, the experimental design simply does
not address the issue of how theory of mind mechanisms function non-consciously.
There are thus at least three factors that limit the conclusions that can be drawn
from such experiments for theory of mind, and especially for the pragmatic claim that
theory of mind characterizes all of our interpersonal interactions.
(1) The experiments explicitly call for the specialized cognitive activities of explain-
ing and predicting.
(2) The experiments involve third-person perspectives rather than second-person
interactions.
(3) The experiments involve conscious processes and do not address theory of mind
mechanisms that operate non-consciously.
THE PRACTICE OF MIND
99
[17] Stich and Nichols (1992) suggest, concerning these experiments, 'the explanation of the data offered
by the experimenters is one that presupposes the correctness of the theory-theory'. One could further
suggest that the kinds of questions that are asked, and the kinds of answers that are sought in these
experiments, are framed by theory of mind's contention that explanation and prediction are primary
ways of interpreting other's minds.
[18] For more on the concept of second-person interaction, and its irreducibility to first-person and/or
third-person perspectives, see Gomez (1996) and Reddy (1996), as well as the previous section.

It might seem that the following experiment could address the second limitation. In
Wimmer, Hogrefe and Sodian (1988), two children face each other and each answers
questions about what they know or about what the other child knows concerning the
contents of a box into which one of them has looked. Children of three and four years
of age answer correctly about their own knowledge, but incorrectly about the other
child's knowledge, even when they see the other child has looked into the box.
Although this seems closer to second-person interaction, the children are not really
interacting on the cognitive level that is being tested. That is, questions are posed by
the experimenter (with whom the children are interacting), but they call for
third-person explanation or prediction of the other person with whom they are not
interacting.
A theory theory interpretation of this experiment is that these children use different
mental processes to assess what they themselves know as opposed to what the other
child knows. To answer about their own knowledge the children use an 'answer check
procedure'. 'They simply check to see whether they have an answer to the embedded
question in their knowledge base, and if they do they respond affirmatively' (Stich and
Nichols, 1992). According to this account they do not know that they know the contents
of the box until they find a belief or piece of knowledge in their own cognitive system.
To say that they know what is in the box, it would not be enough to have looked inside
the box; they would also have to look inside their own minds. They have to 'check' with
themselves in something like a metarepresentative introspection (Leslie, 1988).
It seems more likely, and much more parsimonious, however, that their answer
about what they know is based simply on looking inside the box rather than looking
inside their own mind. The child looks inside the box and is then asked whether she
knows what is in the box. Her positive answer is based on the fact that she just saw
what was inside the box, rather than on an introspective discovery of a belief about
the contents of the box (see Gordon, 1995b). Her knowledge, one might say, is
already in her action. If a subject is asked 'Do you believe that p?' the subject does not
start searching in her mind for the belief that p. Rather, she straightforwardly consid-
ers whether p is or is not the case (see Evans, 1982). In cases when the child does not
know what is in the box, her failure to acknowledge that another child who has looked
inside the box does know would be surprising only to someone who would expect her
to think theoretically, in terms of intentional states abstracted from her own actions.
What is not surprising, however, is that the subject has no problem understanding the
question put to her by the experimenter with whom she is interacting. Nor is there any
indication that she is surprised by the possibility that someone else may or may not
have knowledge.
Children aged four to five years have progressed to the point of having the ability to
tell correctly what another child who has seen the transfer of a piece of candy from
one box to another knows about the contents of the second box. In this part of the
experiment, however, both children (the subject and the other) have seen the transfer
together. One could still say that their knowledge is in their action. But the same age
group fails to understand that in certain circumstances the other child, without visual
knowledge, might know the same fact by inference. Again, this would be surprising
only if the subject understood the other child in terms of having abstract mental states.
The same experiments show that a six-year-old child is capable of precisely this real-
ization and has thus attained some advanced part of a theory of mind. Yet to show that
100
S. GALLAGHER

a child attains a theory of mind at some specific point in development, such that they
can consciously explain or predict what someone with whom they are not interacting
knows, is not to demonstrate that the child's primary understanding of others is based
on theory of mind capabilities. These same children, we would assume, were able to
play together and communicate prior to learning that knowledge and beliefs can be
caused by inference as well as by direct perceptual access.
2.
Mirror neurons
A different sort of scientific evidence has recently been cited in support of simulation
theory, namely the proposal that the specific operations of mirror neurons can con-
tribute to a simulation model of how we understand others. Mirror neurons, located in
the premotor cortex (area F5) of the macaque monkey and, as evidence suggests, in
the premotor cortex and Broca's area in the human (see Fadiga et al., 1995; Rizzolatti
et al., 1996; Grafton et al., 1996), respond both when a particular motor action is per-
formed by the subject and when the subject observes the same goal-directed action
performed by another individual. Mirror neurons thus constitute an intermodal link
between the visual perception of action or dynamic expression and the first-person,
intrasubjective, proprioceptive sense of one's own capabilities.
Simulation theorists suggest that mirror neurons help us to translate our visual per-
ception of the other person's behaviour into a mental plan of that behaviour in our-
selves, thus enabling an explanation or prediction of the other person's thoughts or
actions. Mirror neurons facilitate the creation of pretend ('off-line') actions (motor
images) that correspond to the visually perceived actions of others (Gallese and
Goldman, 1998). Mirror neurons, of course, are part of the motor system, so that the
'plan' that is generated is a motoric one. This, it is argued, at least prefigures (or is a
primitive kind of) mental simulation, and as such it supports simulation theory rather
than theory theory. 'The point is that [mirror neuron] activity is not mere theoretical
inference. It creates in the observer a state that matches that of the target [person]'
(Gallese and Goldman, 1998, p. 498).
This approach addresses some of the limitations found in the false-belief experi-
ments. First, the activation of mirror neurons can be thought to be most appropriately
the result of specific second-person interactions, although they also operate in
third-person perspectives on how others interact.19 Second, studies of mirror neurons
are clearly studies of non-conscious, automatic processes that may or may not be
experienced at a conscious level, although they surely shape conscious behaviour.
Nonetheless, the process described as prefiguring a more mature simulation routine is
described in a fashion similar to the theory theory approach, as resulting in the spe-
cialized cognitive activities of explaining, predicting and 'retrodicting'. Indeed, only
by describing the activity as involving a representational 'plan' (Goldman and
Gallese (2000) reject the idea of a non-representational intentionality) can simulation
THE PRACTICE OF MIND
101
[19] In experimental situations, of course, third-person perspectives are often employed. That is, the obser-
vation of the other person is conducted in a detached rather than interactive setting. This difference is
usually ignored. For example, Ruby and Decety (2001) use the term 'third-person simulation' to sig-
nify the motor simulation of another person's action (in contrast to 'first-person simulation' of one's
own action), without considering whether interactive observation might be different from detached
observation, or for that matter whether the simulation of another's action could itself take the form of
egocentric simulation (that is, I simulate the other's action as if it were my own) or allocentric simula-
tion (I simulate the other's action as if it were her action performed where she is).

theorists claim that mirror neuron activity prefigures the more developed representa-
tional processes involved in explaining and predicting.
The implication of this representationalist view is that the understanding of the
other's behaviour is mediated by a model of ourselves. Goldman and Gallese (2000)
suggest that mirror neurons rely on an 'internal representation of goals, emotions,
body states and the like to map the same states in other individuals' (p. 256). On the
simulation account it would not be enough to see another person's actions and for
them to register in the mirror system; the activation of the neurons must generate an
extra copy of the actions as they would be if they were the perceiver's own actions.
We then read off the meaning of the other, not from her actions, but from the internal
simulation of our own 'as if' actions. This view suggests that in this regard, the sub-
ject who understands the other person is not interacting with the other person so much
as interacting with an internally simulated model of himself pretending to be the other
person. In effect, in contrast to the eclipse of second-person interaction by third-person
observation in false-belief tests, here second-person interaction is reduced to a
first-person internal activity.
Not only is this interpretation not phenomenologically parsimonious, it is also not
clear that the neurological picture supports it. Neuronal patterns (representations)
responsible for either implicit or explicit action simulation are in large part the same
neuronal patterns that are activated in the case of observing action and in performing
action (Grezes and Decety, 2001). In an experimental situation I may be asked to exe-
cute an action, simulate an action or observe an action performed by someone else.
There is significant overlap between action execution, simulation and observation in
the supplementary motor area (SMA), the dorsal premotor cortex, the supramarginal
gyrus and the superior parietal lobe. Mental simulation is, in addition, associated with
activation in the ventral premotor cortex, which may indicate a linguistic contribu-
tion. Observation of action is associated with additional activation in the temporal
pathway, consistent with visual processing. Grezes and Decety suggest that other
non-overlapping areas may be responsible for distinguishing our own agency from
the agency of others (see Ruby and Decety, 2001). There is, however, following the
observation of another person's action, no evidence for a secondary activation of the
overlapping areas that would count as an internal copy (simulation) over and above
the original activation generated by the observation. In other words, if I observe
another person perform action X, then there is activation in the relevant brain areas
that corresponds to the observation. There is no evidence that there is something like
a second activation of those same areas that would correspond to an internal copy or
simulation of action X. The neurological underpinnings of what could count as the
simulation are part and parcel of the activation that corresponds to the original obser-
vation. In effect, perception of action is already an understanding of the action; there
is no extra step involved that could count as a simulation routine.
On this view, mirror neurons are not primarily the mediators of simulation
(although they may play an important role in simulation, which is always a possibility
for the subject), but of direct intersubjective perception and direct action. In principle
there is no reason to think that mirror neurons do not function at birth.20 If they do,
102
S. GALLAGHER
[20] The fact that at birth mirror neurons may be unmyelinated would not prevent them from functioning.
The lack of myelination would simply slow their activation.

they may play a role in neonate imitation. To imitate a facial gesture that it sees, how-
ever, the infant has no need to simulate the gesture internally. It is already simulating
it on its own face. Its own body is already in communication with the other's body at a
perceptual level.
Conclusion
Some of the empirical evidence generally cited in support of theory of mind reflects an
underlying theoretical bias shared by both theory theorists and simulation theorists.
Namely that a normal understanding of others amounts to the explanation and predic-
tion of their behaviour by ascribing to them specific mental states. Given a different
theoretical conception of how we understand others, that is by employing capabilities
of primary intersubjectivity, new experiments may be designed and old ones may be
reinterpreted in ways that would offer important qualifications to theory of mind.
In regard to the developmental claim, I have argued that the picture is more compli-
cated than that presented in theory of mind approaches, and that an embodied practice
of mind begins much earlier than the onset of theory of mind capabilities. That this is
an embodied practice, and that in the capabilities that characterize primary
intersubjectivity the intentions and emotions of other persons are perceptually inter-
preted in movements, gestures, postures, facial expressions and contextualized
behaviours — such facts go directly against the mentalistic supposition that guides
theory theory and simulation theory. Developing a sophisticated understanding of
others depends, first and foremost, on building the capacity for the embodied prac-
tices that come to be manifested in everyday encounters. Capacities for the simulated
and theoretical understanding of others (a more specialized set of cognitive abilities)
depend on the development of these more basic practices.
In regard to the pragmatic claim sometimes made for theory of mind, I have argued
that understanding others in everyday life does not usually involve either taking a
theoretical stance or deploying a simulation routine. It depends instead on a capacity
for embodied practice that begins early (and is likely to be partially innate) and con-
tinues throughout normal (non-pathological) experience. Thus, in contrast to the
strong pragmatic claim for theory of mind, namely that it is our primary and pervasive
means for understanding other persons, I would substitute a strong pragmatic claim
for primary intersubjectivity. It is not just primary in developmental terms: it contin-
ues to characterize most of our interpersonal interactions, and it forms the basis for
the more specialized mentalistic interpretations of how others perform in the practice
of their own minds.
Postscript on Autism
A specific developmental delay in the theory of mind mechanism has been an impor-
tant element in recent explanations of autism. Autistic children demonstrate impair-
ment of certain social abilities. Specifically, autistic children show inadequate
development in the mentalistic understanding of others. Proponents of the theory of
mind approach link these social impairments to delayed development of the cognitive
abilities associated with the theory of mind mechanism. Experiments in support of
this view are based on the standard false-belief tasks, comparing the performance of
normal and Down's Syndrome children to the performance of autistic children. In
such tests, children are asked to judge or predict what other people (or puppets) in a
THE PRACTICE OF MIND
103

story believe or how they will act when one of the characters has a false belief. The
results are quite dramatic. Baron-Cohen (1989) shows that autistic children, more
advanced in mental age than normal and Down's Syndrome children who pass the
test, are unable to recognize the significance of false belief. Leslie and Frith (1988)
suggest that autistic children are specifically impaired in their capacity for
metarepresentation, and this in turn impedes their formulation of a theory of mind. To
the extent that metarepresentation is also necessary for pretence, this view is also con-
sistent with impairments in pretend play in autistic subjects.
Metarepresentation involves taking a view on oneself as if upon another person,
and on some accounts it develops only as an internalization of an already established
social interaction. On this view, however, with respect to autism, the etiological order
is not clear. Rather than understanding a deficit in metarepresentation as the cause of
problems in social interaction, it seems just as feasible to understand a deficit in
metarepresentation as the result of more primary problems in social interaction. Fur-
thermore, there is good evidence to suggest that in autism the deficiency in social
interaction is not confined to cognitive dimensions. In some limited respects the
autistic's cognitive understanding of others can be at age level. For example, the
autistic child may be able to say correctly that the other person does not know that a
sought-for object is in a particular location. In spite of that understanding, the same
child will predict that the person in question will look for it there — an incorrect
response to the false-belief task. Leslie and Frith (1988) explain this as based on an
independence between understanding that the other has limited knowledge and the
understanding of false belief — in effect, a difference between knowing two different
cognitive states. Might it not also be explained as a difference between knowing that
the other person has limited knowledge (a cognitive state) and knowing how the other
person will act? The action will require a certain kind of movement of the other's
body and it may be just that which confuses the prediction.
There is evidence to suggest that across emotional and perceptual dimensions the
autistic child does not understand the embodied behaviour of the other person in the
same way that a normal child would. Autistic children, for example, have difficulties
in perceiving the bodily expression of emotion in others (Moore, Hobson and Lee,
1997) and in imitating certain stylistic aspects of actions performed by others, espe-
cially those stylistic aspects indicative of emotional state. They also have problems in
understanding the other person as a self-oriented agent (Hobson and Lee, 1999).
Some autistic children attempt to perform the imitative action on the experimenter's
body rather than on their own, and thus demonstrate a sensory-motor confusion
between egocentric and allocentric spatial frameworks.21
104
S. GALLAGHER
[21] This is a tentative conclusion based on reviewing videotape of the Hobson and Lee experiments. The
autistic child does not represent his own body in the action of the other. This would also interfere with
any attempt at simulation. In such cases it is as if the autistic child's mirror neurons are not working
properly (see Gallagher, 2001). Also, Ohta (1987) notes a pattern of 'partial imitation' of manual ges-
tures in a significant proportion of autistic subjects. For example, subjects positioned face-to-face with
the model produced gestures that reversed the orientation of the hands. Barresi and Moore (1996) sug-
gest that such problems can be caused by a failure of intermodal integration of first-person
(proprioceptive) information and third-person (visual) information. In the failed imitation,
third-person, visual information, predominates. As a result the autistic person fails to attain the capac-
ity for shared intentional experience normally evident in infants at the end of their first year.

Rutter and Bailey (1993) object to theory of mind explanations based on the fact
that autism appears at the end of the first year of life, that is, prior to the normal develop-
mental timeframe for theory of mind. Baron-Cohen's (2000) response to this objection,
whilst admitting that the pre-theory of mind aspects of primary intersubjectivity are
already amiss in autistic children, interprets such primary intersubjective practices as
'infancy precursors to theory of mind' (p. 1251). If we view embodied practices of
primary intersubjectivity as necessary conditions rather than as precursors to theory
of mind, then the objections of Rutter and Bailey remain cogent. Autistic problems
involving various aspects of social interaction, including emotional and
motor-sensory aspects, as well as the developmentally later cognitive aspects, are
likely to be the result of earlier disruptions in primary intersubjectivity.
References
Allison, T., Puce, Q. and McCarthy, G. (2000), 'Social perception from visual cues: Role of the STS
region', Trends in Cognitive Science, 4 (7), pp. 267-78.
Astington, J.W. and Jenkins, J.M. (1999), 'A longitudinal study of the relation between language and
theory-of-mind development', Developmental Psychology, 35, pp. 1311-20.
Baldwin, D.A. (1993), 'Infants' ability to consult the speaker for clues to word reference', Journal of
Child Language, 20, pp. 395-418.
Baldwin, D.A. and Baird, J.A. (2001), 'Discerning intentions in dynamic human action', Trends in Cog-
nitive Science, 5 (4), pp. 171-8.
Baldwin, D.A. et al. (in press), 'Infants parse dynamic action', Child Development.
Baron-Cohen, S. (1989), 'The autistic child's theory of mind: A case of specific developmental delay',
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 30, pp. 285-98.
Baron-Cohen, S. (1995), Mindblindness: An Essay on Autism and Theory of Mind (Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press).
Baron-Cohen, S. (2000), 'The cognitive neuroscience of autism: Evolutionary approaches', in The New
Cognitive Neurosciences (2nd edn.), ed. M.S. Gazzaniga (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press),
pp. 1249-57.
Baron-Cohen, S., Leslie, A. and Frith, U. (1985), 'Does the autistic child have a theory of mind?', Cog-
nition, 21, pp. 37-46.
Barresi, J. and Moore, C. (1996), 'Intentional relations and social understanding', Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 19 (1), pp. 107-54.
Bermúdez, J. (1996), 'The moral significance of birth', Ethics, 106, pp. 378-403.
Bertenthal, B.I., Proffitt, D.R. and Cutting, J.E. (1984), 'Infant sensitivity to figural coherence in
biomechanical motions', Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 37, pp. 213-30.
Bloom, P. and German, T.P. (2000), 'Two reasons to abandon the false belief task as a test of theory of
mind', Cognition, 77, pp. B25-B31.
Bruner, J. and Kalmar, D.A. (1998), 'Narrative and metanarrative in the construction of self', in
Self-Awareness: Its Nature and Development, ed. M. Ferrari and R.J. Sternberg (New York: Guilford
Press), pp. 308-31.
Carruthers, P. (1996), 'Simulation and self-knowledge: A defence of theory-theory', in Theories of
Theories of Mind, ed. P. Carruthers and P.K. Smith (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press),
pp. 22-38.
Chandler, M.J. and Carpendale, J.I.M. (1998), 'Inching toward a mature theory of mind', in
Self-Awareness: Its Nature and Development, ed. M. Ferrari and R.J. Sternberg (New York: The
Guilford Press), pp. 148-90.
Changeux, P. and Ricoeur, P. (2000), What Makes Us Think?, tr. M.B. DeBevoise (Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press).
Cole, J. (1998), About Face (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
Cole, J. (1999), 'On "being faceless": Selfhood and facial embodiment', in Models of the Self, ed.
S. Gallagher and J. Shear (Exeter: Imprint Academic), pp. 301-18.
Davies, M. and Stone, T. (ed. 1995a), Folk Psychology: The Theory of Mind Debate (Oxford: Blackwell
Publishers).
Davies, M. and Stone, T. (ed. 1995b), Mental Simulation: Evaluations and Applications (Oxford:
Blackwell Publishers).
Davies, M. and Stone, T. (1998), 'Folk psychology and mental simulation', in Contemporary Issues in
the Philosophy of Mind, ed. A. O'Hear, Royal Institute of Philosophy, Supplement 42 (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press).
THE PRACTICE OF MIND
105

Evans, G. (1982), The Varieties of Reference, ed. J. McDowell (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Fadiga, L. et al. (1995), 'Motor facilitation during action observation: A magnetic stimulation study',
Journal of Neurophysiology, 73, pp. 2608-11.
Frith, C.D. and Frith, U. (1999), 'Interacting minds — A biological basis', Science, 286, pp. 1692-5.
Gallagher, S. (1996), 'The moral significance of primitive self-consciousness', Ethics, 107,
pp. 129-40.
Gallagher, S. (2001), 'Emotion and intersubjective perception: A speculative account', in Emotions,
Qualia and Consciousness, ed. A. Kazniak (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press and Naples: Instituto
Italiano per gli Studi Filosofici), pp. 95-100.
Gallagher, S., Butterworth, G., Lew, A. and Cole, J. (1998), 'Hand-mouth coordination, congenital
absence of limb, and evidence for innate body schemas', Brain and Cognition, 38, pp. 53-65.
Gallagher, S. and Marcel, A.J. (1999), 'The self in contextualized action', Journal of Consciousness
Studies, 6 (4), pp. 4-30.
Gallagher, S. and Meltzoff, A.N. (1996), 'The earliest sense of self and others: Merleau-Ponty and
recent developmental studies', Philosophical Psychology, 9, pp. 213-36.
Gallese, V. and Goldman, A.I. (1998), 'Mirror neurons and the simulation theory of mind reading',
Trends in Cognitive Science, 2, pp. 493-501.
Goldman, A.I. (1989), 'Interpretation psychologized', Mind and Language, 4, pp. 161-85; reprinted in
Folk Psychology: The Theory of Mind Debate, ed. M. Davies and T. Stone (Oxford: Blackwell Pub-
lishers, 1995).
Goldman, A.I. and Gallese, V. (2000), 'Reply to Schulkin', Trends in Cognitive Science, 4 (7),
pp. 255-6.
Gomez, J.C. (1996), 'Second person intentional relations and the evolution of social understanding',
Behavioral and Brain Studies, 19 (1), pp. 129-30.
Gopnik, A. and Meltzoff, A.N. (1997), Words, Thoughts, and Theories (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
Gordon, R.M. (1986), 'Folk psychology as simulation', Mind and Language, 1, pp. 158-71; reprinted in
Folk Psychology: The Theory of Mind Debate, ed. M. Davies and T. Stone (Oxford: Blackwell Pub-
lishers, 1995).
Gordon, R.M. (1995a), 'Simulation without introspection or inference from Me to You', in Mental Sim-
ulation: Evaluations and Applications, ed. M. Davies and T. Stone (Oxford: Blackwell Publishers,
1995).
Gordon, R.M. (1995b), 'Developing commonsense psychology: Experimental data and philosophical
data', APA Eastern Division Symposium on Children's Theory of Mind, 27 December 1995
(http://www.umsl.edu/~philo/Mind_Seminar/New%20Pages/papers/Gordon/apakids9.htm).
Grafton, S.T. et al. (1996), 'Localization of grasp representations in humans by PET: II: Observations
compared with imagination', Experimental Brain Research, 112, pp. 103-11.
Grezes, J. and Decety, J. (2001), 'Functional anatomy of execution, mental simulation, observation,
and verb generation of actions: A meta-analysis', Human Brain Mapping, 12, pp. 1-19.
Heal, J. (1986), 'Replication and functionalism', in Language, Mind, and Logic, ed. J. Butterfield
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press); reprinted in Folk Psychology: The Theory of Mind
Debate, ed. M. Davies and T. Stone (Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 1995).
Heal, J. (1998a), 'Co-cognition and off-line simulation: Two ways of understanding the simulation
approach', Mind and Language, 13, pp. 477-98.
Heal, J. (1998b), 'Understanding other minds from the inside', in Current Issues in Philosophy of Mind,
ed. A. O'Hear (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Heidegger, M. (1968), Being and Time, trans. J. Macquarrie and E. Robinson (New York: Harper and
Row).
Hobson, P. (1993), 'The emotional origins of social understanding', Philosophical Psychology, 6,
pp. 227-49.
Hobson, P. and Lee, A. (1999), 'Imitation and identification in autism', Journal of Child Psychology
and Psychiatry, 40, pp. 649-59.
Jacobson, A. (2000), 'The soul unto itself: Self-knowledge and a science of the mind', Arobase: Jour-
nal des lettres et sciences humaines, 4 (1-2), pp. 100-24.
Jeannerod, M. (1997), The Cognitive Neuroscience of Action (Oxford: Blackwell Publishers).
Johnson, S.C. (2000), 'The recognition of mentalistic agents in infancy', Trends in Cognitive Science,
4, pp. 22-8.
Johnson, S. et al. (1998), 'Whose gaze will infants follow? The elicitation of gaze-following in
12-month-old infants', Developmental Science, 1, pp. 233-8.
Legerstee, M. (1991), 'The role of person and object in eliciting early imitation', Journal of Experimen-
tal Child Psychology, 51, pp. 423-33.
Leslie, A. (1988), 'Some implications of pretense for mechanisms underlying the child's theory of
mind', in Developing Theories of Mind, ed. J. Astington, P. Harris and D. Olson (Cambridge: CUP).
Leslie, A. (1991), 'The theory of mind impairment in autism: Evidence for a modular mechanism of
development?', in Natural Theories of Mind: Evolution, Development and Simulation of Everyday
Mindreading, ed. A. Whiten (Oxford: Blackwell).
106
S. GALLAGHER

Leslie, A. (1994), 'ToMM, ToBy, and Agency: Core architecture and domain specificity', in Mapping
the Mind: Domain Specificity in Cognition and Culture, ed. L. Hirschfeld and S. Gelman (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press).
Leslie, A. (2000), ' "Theory of mind" as a mechanism of selective attention', in The New Cognitive
Neurosciences, ed. M. Gazzaniga (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), pp. 1235-47.
Leslie, A. and Frith, U. (1988), 'Autistic children's understanding of seeing, knowing and believing',
British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 6, pp. 315-24.
Leslie, A. and Thaiss, L. (1992), 'Domain specificity in conceptual development: Neuropsychological evi-
dence from autism', Cognition, 43, pp. 225-51.
Meltzoff, A.N. (1995), 'Understanding the intentions of others: Re-enactment of intended acts by
18-month-old children', Developmental Psychology, 31, pp. 838-50.
Meltzoff, A.N. and Brooks, R. (In press), '"Like me" as a building block for understanding other minds:
Bodily acts, attention, and intention', in Intentions and Intentionality: Foundations of Social Cogni-
tion, ed. B.F. Malle et al. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
Meltzoff, A. and Moore, M.K. (1977), 'Imitation of facial and manual gestures by human neonates',
Science, 198, pp. 75-8.
Meltzoff, A. and Moore, M.K. (1994), 'Imitation, memory, and the representation of persons', Infant
Behavior and Development, 17, pp. 83-99.
Meltzoff, A.N. and Prinz, W. (2001), The Imitative Mind; Development, Evolution, and Brain Bases
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1962), Phenomenology of Perception, trans. C. Smith (London: Routledge and
Kegan Paul).
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1964), The Primacy of Perception, trans. W. Cobb (Evanston, IL: Northwestern
University Press).
Moore, D.G., Hobson, R.P. and Lee, A. (1997), 'Components of person perception: An investigation
with autistic, non-autistic retarded and typically developing children and adolescents', British Jour-
nal of Developmental Psychology, 15, pp. 401-23.
Nadel, J. and Butterworth, G. (1999), Imitation in Infancy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Ohta, M. (1987), 'Cognitive disorders of infantile autism: A study employing the WISC, spatial rela-
tionship conceptualization, and gesture imitation', Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders,
17, pp. 45-62.
Perner, J. (1991), Understanding the Representational Mind (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
Perner, J., Leekam, S.R. and Wimmer, H. (1987), 'Three-year olds' difficulty with false belief: The case
for a conceptual deficit', British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 5, pp. 125-37.
Phillips, W., Baron-Cohen, S. and Rutter, M. (1992), 'The role of eye-contact in the detection of goals:
Evidence from normal toddlers, and children with autism or mental handicap', Development and
Psychopathology, 4, pp. 375-83.
Pinker, S. (1994), The Language Instinct (Baltimore: Penguin).
Reddy, V. (1996), 'Omitting the second person in social understanding', Behavioral and Brain Sci-
ences, 19 (1), pp. 140-1.
Rizzolatti, G. et al. (1996), 'Localization of grasp representations in humans by PET: I. Observation
versus execution', Experimental Brain Research, 111, pp. 246-52.
Ruby, P. and Decety, J. (2001), 'Effect of subjective perspective taking during simulation of action: A
PET investigation of agency', Nature Neuroscience, 4 (5), pp. 546-50.
Rutter, M. and Bailey, A. (1993), 'Thinking and relationships: Mind and brain', in Understanding
Other Minds: Perspectives from Autism, ed. S. Baron-Cohen and H. Tager-Flusberg (Oxford: Oxford
University Press).
Ryle, G. (1949), The Concept of Mind (New York: Barnes and Noble).
Scholl, B.J. and Tremoulet, P.D. (2000), 'Perceptual causality and animacy', Trends in Cognitive Sci-
ence, 4 (8), pp. 299-309.
Schwitzgebel, E. (1999a), 'Children's theories and the drive to explain', Science and Education, 8,
pp. 457-88.
Schwitzgebel, E. (1999b), 'Gradual belief change in children', Human Development, 42, pp. 283-96.
Schwitzgebel, E. (in press), 'A phenomenal, dispositional account of belief', Nous.
Searle, J.R. (1984), Minds, Brains, and Science (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press).
Siegal, M. and Beattie, K. (1991), 'Where to look for children's knowledge of false beliefs', Cognition,
38, pp. 1-12.
Stich, S. and Nichols, S. (1992), 'Folk psychology: Simulation or tacit theory?', Mind and Language, 7,
pp. 35-71
Surian, L. and Leslie, A. (1999), 'Competence and performance in false belief understanding: A com-
parison of autistic and three-year-old children', British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 17,
pp. 141-55.
Tooby, J. and Cosmides, L. (1995), 'Foreword' to S. Baron-Cohen, Mindblindness: An Essay on Autism
and Theory of Mind (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), pp. xi-xviii.
THE PRACTICE OF MIND
107

Trevarthen, C. (1979), 'Communication and cooperation in early infancy: A description of primary
intersubjectivity', in Before Speech, ed. M. Bullowa (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Varley, R. and Siegal, M. (2000), 'Evidence for cognition without grammar from causal reasoning and
"theory of mind" in an agrammatic aphasic patient', Current Biology, 10, pp. 723-6.
Walker, A.S. (1982), 'Intermodal perception of expressive behaviors by human infants', Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 33, pp. 514-35.
Wellman, H.M. (1993), 'Early understanding of mind: The normal case', in Understanding Other
Minds: Perspectives from Autism, ed. S. Baron-Cohen, H. Tager-Flusberg and D.J. Cohen (Oxford:
Oxford University Press).
Wimmer, H. and Perner, J. (1983), 'Beliefs about beliefs: Representation and constraining function of
wrong beliefs in young children's understanding of deception', Cognition, 13, pp. 103-28.
Wimmer, H., Hogrefe, J. and Sodian, B. (1988), 'A second stage in children's conception of mental life:
Understanding informational access as origins of knowledge and belief', in Developing Theories of
Mind, ed. J. Astington, P. Harris and D. Olson (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), pp.
173-92.
108
S. GALLAGHER

