Mind in Life
BIOLOGY, PHENOMENOLOGY,
AND THE SCIENCES OF MIND
N  N  N
Evan Thompson
THE BELKNAP PRESS OF
HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England

Copyright © 2007 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Thompson, Evan.
Mind in life : biology, phenomenology, and the sciences of mind / Evan Thompson.
p.
cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-674-02511-0 (cloth : alk. paper)
ISBN 978-0-674-05751-7 (pbk.)
1. Consciousness.
2. Philosophy of mind.
3. Phenomenology.
4. Mind and body.
5. Experience.
I. Title.
B808.9.T45
2007
128'.2—dc22
2006050713
First Harvard University Press paperback edition, 2010

To
Gabriel Cohen Varela
Maximilian Todd Williams
Gareth Todd Thompson

Preface
ix
Acknowledgments
xi
PART ONE
The Enactive Approach
1
ONE
Cognitive Science and Human Experience
3
TWO
The Phenomenological Connection
16
THREE
Autonomy and Emergence
37
FOUR
The Structure of Behavior
66
PART TWO
Life in Mind
89
FIVE
Autopoiesis: The Organization of the Living
91
SIX
Life and Mind: The Philosophy of the Organism
128
SEVEN
Laying Down a Path in Walking: 
Development and Evolution
166
Contents

PART THREE
Consciousness in Life
219
EIGHT
Life beyond the Gap
221
NINE
Sensorimotor Subjectivity
243
TEN
Look Again: Consciousness and Mental Imagery
267
ELEVEN
Temporality and the Living Present
312
TWELVE
Primordial Dynamism: Emotion and Valence
360
THIRTEEN
Empathy and Enculturation
382
APPENDIX A:
Husserl and Cognitive Science
413
APPENDIX B:
Emergence and the Problem of
Downward Causation
417
Notes
443
References
483
Index
527
viii
Contents

THE THEME OF THIS BOOK is the deep continuity of life and mind.
Where there is life there is mind, and mind in its most articulated forms
belongs to life. Life and mind share a core set of formal or organiza-
tional properties, and the formal or organizational properties distinc-
tive of mind are an enriched version of those fundamental to life. More
precisely, the self-organizing features of mind are an enriched version of
the self-organizing features of life. The self-producing or "autopoietic"
organization of biological life already implies cognition, and this incip-
ient mind ﬁnds sentient expression in the self-organizing dynamics of
action, perception, and emotion, as well as in the self-moving ﬂow of
time-consciousness.
From this perspective, mental life is also bodily life and is situated in
the world. The roots of mental life lie not simply in the brain, but
ramify through the body and environment. Our mental lives involve
our body and the world beyond the surface membrane of our or-
ganism, and therefore cannot be reduced simply to brain processes in-
side the head.
The chapters to come elaborate these ideas using material drawn
from three main sources—biology, phenomenological philosophy,
and psychology and neuroscience. The book as a whole is intended to
bring the experimental sciences of life and mind into a closer and
more harmonious relationship with phenomenological investigations
of experience and subjectivity.
The principal motive behind this aim is to make headway on one of
Preface

the outstanding philosophical and scientiﬁc problems of our time—
the so-called explanatory gap between consciousness and nature. Ex-
actly how are consciousness and subjective experience related to the
brain and body? It is one thing to be able to establish correlations be-
tween consciousness and brain activity; it is another thing to have an
account that explains exactly how certain biological processes gen-
erate and realize consciousness and subjectivity. At the present time,
we not only lack such an account, but also are unsure about the form it
would need to have in order to bridge the conceptual and epistemo-
logical gap between life and mind as objects of scientiﬁc investigation,
and life and mind as we subjectively experience them.
In this book, I offer no new or original theory or model of con-
sciousness, no new conceptual analysis of physical and phenomenal
concepts, and no new speculative metaphysical synthesis to unify con-
sciousness and nature. My aim and approach are different. To make
real progress on the explanatory gap, we need richer phenomenolog-
ical accounts of the structure of experience, and we need scientiﬁc ac-
counts of mind and life informed by these phenomenological ac-
counts. Phenomenology in turn needs to be informed by psychology,
neuroscience, and biology. My aim is not to close the explanatory gap
in a reductive sense, but rather to enlarge and enrich the philosoph-
ical and scientiﬁc resources we have for addressing the gap. My ap-
proach is thus to bring phenomenological analyses of experience into
a mutually illuminating relationship with scientiﬁc analyses of life and
mind.
x
Preface

I CANNOT HELP but think of this book as exemplifying what philoso-
phers call the bundle theory of personal identity. According to the
bundle theory, there is no single and permanent self that persists
through time; the self is rather a bundle of constantly changing and
psychologically continuous experiences or mental episodes. Simi-
larly, this book began many years ago and has undergone so many
transformations since its inception that I cannot say with any conﬁ-
dence that it is the "same" book I started work on more than ten
years ago.
Originally, this book (or its textual ancestor) was supposed to be co-
authored with Francisco Varela. We had hoped to write a follow-up to
our book (co-authored with Eleanor Rosch), The Embodied Mind: Cog-
nitive Science and Human Experience (MIT Press, 1991). When we began
planning our new book (in 1994), Francisco had just learned that he
was chronically ill with Hepatitis C. Thus, from the beginning, a sense
of urgency lay over this book. Eventually it became clear that Francisco
would need a liver transplant. At this time (in 1998), Francisco de-
cided to step back from the project and encouraged me to continue
on my own. I thus set about to revise the book by myself. After the suc-
cess of the transplant, Francisco felt new enthusiasm for the project,
and we tried to resume our collaborative efforts. Sadly, his illness re-
turned not long afterward, and Francisco died on May 28, 2001, at his
home in Paris. The obituary I wrote a few days later for the online
journal Psyche can be read at: http://psyche.cs.monash.edu.au/v7/
Acknowledgments

psyche-7-12-thompson.html An abridged version was also published in
Journal of Consciousness Studies 8 (2001): 66-69.
After Francisco's death, I tried to continue writing this book as a co-
authored one. But there was still a large amount of writing to be done,
and as time passed it became clear that the book needed to be com-
pletely recast and rewritten by me alone. I reorganized and rewrote
the chapters, and changed the title twice, before the book ﬁnally took
its present form. Thus, although the enormous inﬂuence of Fran-
cisco's thought will be evident to anyone who reads this book, I bear
full responsibility for this work's contents, and all shortcomings and
errors are mine.
Over the long and difﬁcult time it has taken to produce this book, I
have had the support and encouragement of many people.
No one has given me more encouragement, aid, and love, and
shared more in the tumultuous life of this book, than Rebecca Todd.
The love and gratitude I feel are beyond expression. In addition to
living with my long periods of self-absorption while struggling with this
book, she has read numerous drafts and helped me improve my
thinking and writing immeasurably. I cannot imagine having written
this book without her.
Our sons Maximilian Todd Williams and Gareth Todd Thompson
have had to endure my working on this book for almost their entire
lives. My gratitude to them is boundless. I dedicate this book to them,
and to our dear family friend, Gabriel Cohen Varela, son of Francisco
Varela and Amy Cohen Varela, and the same age as my younger son.
Gail Thompson, William Irwin Thompson, and Hilary Thompson
have given great support in ways too numerous to detail. I am deeply
grateful to them.
I also express deep thanks to John and Nancy Todd for their en-
couragement over many years.
Amy Cohen Varela's enthusiasm for this book, and her unhesitating
support and encouragement when I decided to transform it into a
single-authored work after Francisco's death, are deeply appreciated.
Alva Noë's friendship and intellectual companionship during the
writing of this book are greatly valued. I express my gratitude to him
also for comments on early versions of several chapters, and for his
reading and commenting on the penultimate version of the entire
manuscript.
xii
Acknowledgments

Many people over the years have read various portions of this book
and given helpful advice along the way: Giovanna Colombetti, Diego
Cosmelli, Isabela Granic, Robert Hanna, Marc Lewis, Antoine Lutz,
Susan Oyama, Michael Silberstein, Dan Zahavi, and Phil Zelazo.
For helpful discussions on a wide variety of topics related to this
book, I thank Lisa Adams, Ralph Adolphs, Michel Bitbol, Maria
Botero, Paul Bourgine, Richie Davidson, Natalie Depraz, Jean-Pierre
Dupuy, Frans de Waal, Adam Engle, Michel Ferrari, Shaun Gallagher,
Vittorio Gallese, Tom Hollenstein, Evelyn Fox Keller, Uriah Kriegel,
Jean-Philippe Lachaux, Connie Lamm, Alex Lamey, Dorothée
Legrand, Michel Le Van Quyen, Luigi Luisi, Jun Luo, Eduard Mar-
bach, Barry McMullin, Bernard Pachoud, Slobodan Perovic, Claire Pe-
titmengin, Jean Petitot, Ljiljana Radenovic, Franz Reichle, Eugenio
Rodriguez, Andreas Roepstorff, Jean-Michel Roy, David Rudrauf,
Brian Cantwell Smith, John Stewart, Steve Torrence, Joel Walmsley,
Mark Wexler, and Arthur Zajonc.
The penultimate version of this book served as the main text for a
graduate seminar in "Phenomenological Philosophy of Mind" I taught
during the Fall Term 2005, in the Department of Philosophy at the
University of Toronto. I am grateful to everyone who attended that
seminar—especially Ranpal Dosanjh, David Egan, Cathal Ó Madagáin,
Joshua Ben Nichols, Adrienne Prettyman, and Joel Walmsley—for
their critical responses to the text.
Helena De Preester, at short notice, read the penultimate version of
the text and sent me numerous detailed and insightful comments that
helped my ﬁnal revisions considerably.
Mike Wheeler also read the entire manuscript and helpfully called
attention to several places where my arguments could be improved.
I am particularly thankful for the patience of Lindsay Waters at the
Harvard University Press. His encouragement and speedy efﬁciency
when the manuscript ﬁnally arrived on his desk are much appreciated.
I am grateful to several institutions and individuals for their support.
During March and April 2003, I stayed as a visting Mâitre de Recherche
at the Centre de Recherche en Epistémologie Appliqué (CREA), at the
Ecole Polytechnique, Paris. I wish to thank its director, Jean Petitot, for
this opportunity, which greatly aided me in writing this book. I also
thank Dan Zahavi, director of the Center for Subjectivity Research at
the University of Copenhagen, for inviting me to visit for two weeks in
Acknowledgments
xiii

June 2004 and June 2005, and for numerous productive exchanges
during this time. Finally, I am grateful to the McDonnell Project in Phi-
losophy and the Neurosciences, its director, Kathleen Akins, and my
fellow project members, for their interest in and support of my work.
For ﬁnancial support, I am grateful to the Social Sciences and Hu-
manities Research Council of Canada for a Standard Research Grant
(1998-2001) and a Canada Research Chair (2002-2007); York Univer-
sity for a Faculty of Arts Research Fellowship (2001-2002); the Mc-
Donnell Project in Philosophy and Neuroscience; the Center for Con-
sciousness Studies at the University of Arizona, Tucson; and the
University of Toronto for a Connaught Start-up Research Award.
An earlier version of Chapter 9 was published as the article "Sensori-
motor Subjectivity and the Enactive Approach to Experience," in Phe-
nomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 4 (2005): 407-427 (© Springer-
Verlag). Chapter 10 is an expanded version of "Look Again:
Phenomenology and Mental Imagery," in Phenomenology and the Cogni-
tive Sciences (in press; © Springer-Verlag), and of "Representationalism
and the Phenomenology of Mental Imagery," in Synthese (in press; ©
Springer-Verlag). I am grateful to the editor of these journals for per-
mission to use this material in revised form here.
Finally, I am grateful to my former colleagues at York University and
my new colleagues at the University of Toronto for their encourage-
ment and interest in my work.
xiv
Acknowledgments

P A R T  O N E
N
The Enactive Approach

COGNITIVE SCIENCE—that part of the science of the mind tradition-
ally concerned with cognitive processes—has been described as having
"a very long past but a relatively short history" (Gardner 1985, p. 9).
Scientiﬁc concern with the mind can be traced all the way back to
Plato and Aristotle, but the term cognitive science did not arise until the
late twentieth century, as a name for the new, modern, scientiﬁc re-
search progam that integrated psychology, neuroscience, linguistics,
computer science, artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), and philosophy. What
united these disciplines, and set cognitive science apart from earlier
approaches in psychology and philosophy, was the goal of making ex-
plicit the principles and mechanisms of cognition. Cognitive science,
in providing a whole new array of concepts, models, and experimental
techniques, claimed to be able to provide rigorous scientiﬁc knowl-
edge of the mind beyond what earlier forms of psychology and philos-
ophy had offered.
In recent years, however, it has become increasingly clear to many
researchers that cognitive science is incomplete. Cognitive science has
focused on cognition while neglecting emotion, affect, and motivation
(LeDoux 2002, p. 24). In addition, a complete science of the mind
needs to account for subjectivity and consciousness.
With hindsight it has also become evident that, in the passage from
traditional philosophy and psychology to modern-day cognitive sci-
ence, something was lost that only now is beginning to be reclaimed.
What was lost, in a nutshell, was scientiﬁc concern with subjective ex-
3
O N E
N  N  N
Cognitive Science and Human Experience

4
The Enactive Approach
perience. In 1892 William James quoted with approval George Trum-
ball Ladd's deﬁnition of psychology "as the description and explana-
tion of states of consciousness as such" (James 1985, p. xxv; emphasis
omitted). Consciousness was supposed to be the subject matter of psy-
chology, yet cognitive science has had virtually nothing to say about it
until recent years. To understand this neglect we need to consider the
development of cognitive science since the 1950s.
Three major approaches to the study of the mind can be distin-
guished within cognitive science—cognitivism, connectionism, and
embodied dynamicism. Each approach has its preferred theoretical
metaphor for understanding the mind. For cognitivism, the metaphor
is the mind as digital computer; for connectionism, it is the mind as
neural network; for embodied dynamicism, it is the mind as an em-
bodied dynamic system. Cognitivism dominated the ﬁeld from the
1950s to the 1970s. In the 1980s, connectionism began to challenge
the cognitivist orthodoxy, followed in the 1990s by embodied dynami-
cism. In contemporary research, all three approaches coexist, both
separately and in various hybrid forms.1
Cognitivism
Cognitive science came into being in the 1950s with the "cognitive rev-
olution" against behaviorist psychology. At the center of this revolution
was the computer model of mind, now known as the classical concep-
tion of cognitive processes. According to this classical model, cogni-
tion is information processing after the fashion of the digital com-
puter. Behaviorism had allowed no reference to internal states of the
organism; explanations of behavior had to be formulated in terms of
sensory stimuli and behavioral conditioning (on the input side), and
overt behavioral response (on the output side). The computer model
of the mind not only made reference to internal states legitimate, but
also showed it to be necessary in accounting for the behavior of com-
plex information processing systems. Even more important, the com-
puter model was taken to show how content or meaning could be at-
tributed to states inside the system. A computer is supposed to be a
symbol-manipulating machine.2 A symbol is an item that has a physical
shape or form, and that stands for or represents something. According
to the computer model of the mind, the brain, too, is a computer, a

Cognitive Science and Human Experience
5
"physical symbol system," and mental processes are carried out by the
manipulation of symbolic representations in the brain (Newell and
Simon 1976; Pylyshyn 1984). A typical cognitivist model takes the form
of a program for solving a problem in some domain. Nonsymbolic sen-
sory inputs are transduced and mapped onto symbolic representations
of the task domain. These representations are then manipulated in a
purely formal or syntactic fashion in order to arrive at a solution to the
problem. Cognitivist explanations focus on the abstract problem-
solving characterization of cognitive tasks, the structure and content of
symbolic representations, and the nature of the algorithms for manip-
ulating the representations in order to solve a given problem. Cogni-
tivism goes hand in hand with functionalism in the philosophy of
mind, which in its extreme computational form holds that the embod-
iment of the organism is essentially irrelevant to the nature of the
mind. It is the software, not the hardware, that matters most for men-
tality.
Cognitivism made meaning, in the sense of representational seman-
tics, scientiﬁcally acceptable, but at the price of banishing conscious-
ness from the science of the mind. (In fact, cognitivism inherited its
consciousness taboo directly from behaviorism.) Mental processes, un-
derstood to be computations made by the brain using an inner sym-
bolic language, were taken to be entirely nonconscious. Thus the con-
nection between mind and meaning, on the one hand, and subjectivity
and consciousness, on the other, was completely severed.
Long before cognitivism, Freud had already undermined any sim-
plistic identiﬁcation of mind and consciousness. According to his early
model, the psyche is composed of three systems, which he called the
conscious, the preconscious, and the unconscious (Freud 1915, pp.
159-222). The conscious corresponds to the ﬁeld of awareness, and
the preconscious to what we can recall but are not aware of now. The
unconscious, in contrast, Freud considered to be part of our phyloge-
netic heritage. It is thoroughly somatic and affective, and its contents
have been radically separated from consciousness by repression and
cannot enter the conscious-preconscious system without distortion.
(Later, Freud introduced a new structural model composed of the ego,
id, and superego; see Freud 1923, pp. 339-407.)
The cognitivist separation of cognition and consciousness, however,
was different from Freud's model. Mental processes, according to cog-

6
The Enactive Approach
nitivism, are "subpersonal routines," which by nature are completely
inaccessible to personal awareness under any conditions. The mind
was divided into two radically different regions, with an unbridgeable
chasm between them—the subjective mental states of the person and
the subpersonal cognitive routines implemented in the brain. The rad-
ically nonconscious, subpersonal region, the so-called cognitive un-
conscious, is where the action of thought really happens; personal
awareness has access merely to a few results or epiphenomenal mani-
festations of subpersonal processing (Jackendoff 1987). Thought cor-
responds to nonconscious, skull-bound, symbol manipulation. It takes
place in a central cognitive module of the brain separate from the sys-
tems for perception, emotion, and motor action. The cognitive un-
conscious is neither somatic nor affective, and it is lodged ﬁrmly within
the head.
This radical separation of cognitive processes from consciousness
created a peculiar "explanatory gap" in scientiﬁc theorizing about the
mind.3 Cartesian dualism had long ago created an explanatory gap be-
tween mind and matter, consciousness and nature. Cognitivism, far
from closing this gap, perpetuated it in a materialist form by opening a
new gap between subpersonal, computational cognition and subjective
mental phenomena. Simply put, cognitivism offered no account what-
soever of mentality in the sense of subjective experience. Some theo-
rists even went so far as to claim that subjectivity and consciousness do
not fall within the province of cognitive science (Pylyshyn 1984). Not
all theorists shared this view, however. A notable exception was Ray
Jackendoff, who clearly formulated the problem facing cognitivism in
his 1987 book Consciousness and the Computational Mind. According to
Jackendoff, cognitivism, in radically differentiating computational cog-
nition from subjective experience, produced a new "mind-mind"
problem, in addition to the classical mind-body problem. The mind-
mind problem is the problem of the relation between the computa-
tional mind and the phenomenological mind, between subpersonal,
computational, cognitive processes and conscious experience ( Jack-
endoff 1987, p. 20). Thanks to cognitivism, a new set of mind-body
problems had to be faced:
1. The phenomenological mind-body problem: How can a brain
have experiences?

Cognitive Science and Human Experience
7
2. The computational mind-body problem: How can a brain ac-
complish reasoning?
3. The mind-mind problem: What is the relation between compu-
tational states and experience?
Each problem is a variant of the explanatory gap. The cognitivist
metaphor of the mind as computer, which was meant to solve the com-
putational mind-body problem, thus came at the cost of creating a new
problem, the mind-mind problem. This problem is a version of what is
now known as the "hard problem of consciousness" (Chalmers 1996;
Nagel 1974).
During the heyday of cognitivism in the 1970s and early 1980s, cog-
nitivists liked to proclaim that their view was "the only game in town"
(Fodor 1975, 1981), and they insisted that the computer model of the
mind is not a metaphor but a scientiﬁc theory (Pylyshyn 1984), unlike
earlier mechanistic models, such as the brain as a telephone switch-
board. The cognitive anthropologist Edwin Hutchins (1995), however,
has argued that a confused metaphorical transference from culture to
individual psychology lies at the very origin of the cognitivist view. Cog-
nitivism derives from taking what is in fact a sociocultural activity—
human computation—and projecting it onto something that goes on
inside the individual's head. The cognitive properties of computation
do not belong to the individual person but to the sociocultural system
of individual-plus-environment.
The original model of a computational system was a person—a
mathematician or logician manipulating symbols with hands and eyes,
and pen and paper. (The word "computer" originally meant "one who
computes.") This kind of physical symbol system is a sophisticated and
culturally speciﬁc form of human activity. It is embodied, requiring
perception and motor action, and embedded in a sociocultural envi-
ronment of symbolic cognition and technology. It is not bounded by
the skull or skin but extends into the environment. The environment,
for its part, plays a necessary and active role in the cognitive processes
themselves; it is not a mere contingent, external setting (Clark and
Chalmers 1998; Wilson 1994). Nevertheless, the human mind is able to
idealize and conceptualize computation in the abstract as the mechan-
ical application of formal rules to symbol strings, as Alan Turing did in
arriving at his mathematical notion of a Turing Machine. Turing suc-

8
The Enactive Approach
cessfully abstracted away from both the world in which the mathemati-
cian computes and the psychological processes he or she uses to per-
form a computation. But what do such abstract formal systems reﬂect
or correspond to in the real world? According to the cognitivist "cre-
ation myth," what Turing succeeded in capturing was the bare essen-
tials of intelligent thought or cognition within the individual (all the
rest being mere implementation details).
The problem with this myth is that real human computation—the
original source domain for conceptualizing computation in the ab-
stract—was never simply an internal psychological process; it was a 
sociocultural activity as well. Computation, in other words, never re-
ﬂected simply the cognitive properties of the individual, but instead
those of the sociocultural system in which the individual is embedded.
Therefore, when one abstracts away from the situated individual what
remains is precisely not the bare essentials of individual cognition, but
rather the bare essentials of the sociocultural system: "The physical-
symbol-system architecture is not a model of individual cognition. It is
a model of the operation of a sociocultural system from which the
human actor has been removed" (Hutchins 1995, p. 363; emphasis
omitted). Whether abstract computation is well suited to model the
structure of thought processes within the individual is therefore ques-
tionable. Nevertheless, cognitivism, instead of realizing that its com-
puter programs reproduced (or extended) the abstract properties of
the sociocultural system, projected the physical-symbol-system model
onto the brain. Because cognitivism from its inception abstracted away
from culture, society, and embodiment, it remained resistant to this
kind of critical analysis and was wedded to a reiﬁed metaphor of the
mind as a computer in the head.4
The connectionist challenge to cognitivism, however, did not take
the form of this kind of critique. Rather, connectionist criticism fo-
cused on the neurological implausibility of the physical-symbol-system
model and various perceived deﬁciencies of symbol processing com-
pared with neural networks (McLelland, Rummelhart, and the PDP
Research Group 1986; Smolensky 1988).
Connectionism
Connectionism arose in the early 1980s, revising and revitalizing ideas
from the precognitivist era of cybernetics.5 Connectionism is now

Cognitive Science and Human Experience
9
widespread. Its central metaphor of the mind is the neural network.
Connectionist models of cognitive processes take the form of artiﬁcial
neural networks, which are virtual systems run on a digital computer.
An artiﬁcial neural network is composed of layers of many simple
neuron-like units that are linked together by numerically weighted
connections. The connection strengths change according to various
learning rules and the system's history of activity.
The network is trained to convert numerical (rather than symbolic)
input representations into numerical output representations. Given
appropriate input and training, the network converges toward some
particular cognitive performance, such as producing speech sounds
from written text (as in the famous NETtalk system of Sejnowski and
Rosenberg 1986), or categorizing words according to their lexical role
(Elman 1991). Such cognitive performances correspond to emergent
patterns of activity in the network. These patterns are not symbols in
the traditional computational sense, although they are supposed to be
approximately describable in symbolic terms (Smolensky 1988). Con-
nectionist explanations focus on the architecture of the neural net-
work (units, layers, and connections), the learning rules, and the dis-
tributed subsymbolic representations that emerge from the network's
activity. According to connectionism, artiﬁcial neural networks cap-
ture the abstract cognitive properties of neural networks in the brain
and provide a better model of the cognitive architecture of the mind
than the physical symbol systems of cognitivism.
The connectionist movement of the 1980s emphasized perceptual
pattern recognition as the paradigm of intelligence, in contrast to de-
ductive reasoning, emphasized by cognitivism. Whereas cognitivism
ﬁrmly lodged the mind within the head, connectionism offered a
more dynamic conception of the relation between cognitive processes
and the environment. For example, connectionists hypothesized that
the structural properties of sequential reasoning and linguistic cogni-
tion arise not from manipulations of symbols in the brain, but from
the dynamic interaction of neural networks with symbolic resources in
the external environment, such as diagrams, numerical symbols, and
natural language (Rummelhart et al. 1986).
Despite these advances, connectionist systems did not involve any
sensory and motor coupling with the environment, but instead oper-
ated on the basis of artiﬁcial inputs and outputs (set initially by the de-
signer of the system). Connectionism also inherited from cognitivism

10
The Enactive Approach
the idea that cognition is basically the solving of predeﬁned problems
(posed to the system from outside by the observer or designer) and
that the mind is essentially the skull-bound cognitive unconscious, the
subpersonal domain of computational representation in the mind-
brain. Connectionism's disagreement with cognitivism was over the
nature of computation and representation (symbolic for cognitivists,
subsymbolic for connectionists).
With regard to the problem of the explanatory gap, connectionism
enlarged the scope of the computational mind but provided little, if
any, new resources for addressing the gap between the computational
mind and the phenomenological mind. Subjectivity still had no place
in the sciences of mind, and the explanatory gap remained unad-
dressed.
Embodied Dynamicism
The third approach, embodied dynamicism, arose in the 1990s and in-
volved a critical stance toward computationalism in either its cogni-
tivist or connectionist form.6 Cognitivism and connectionism left un-
questioned the relation between cognitive processes and the real
world. As a result, their models of cognition were disembodied and ab-
stract. On the one hand, cognitive processes were said to be instanti-
ated (or realized or implemented) in the brain, with little thought
given to what such a notion could mean, given the biological facts of
the brain and its relationship to the living body of the organism and to
the environment. On the other hand, the relationship between the
mind and the world was assumed to be one of abstract representation:
symbolic or subsymbolic representations in the mind-brain stand for
states of affairs in some restricted outside domain that has been speci-
ﬁed in advance and independently of the cognitive system. The mind
and the world were thus treated as separate and independent of each
other, with the outside world mirrored by a representational model in-
side the head. Embodied dynamicism called into question all of these
assumptions, in particular the conception of cognition as disembodied
and abstract mental representation. Like connectionism, embodied
dynamicism focuses on self-organizing dynamic systems rather than
physical symbol systems (connectionist networks are examples of self-
organizing dynamic systems), but maintains in addition that cognitive

Cognitive Science and Human Experience
11
processes emerge from the nonlinear and circular causality of contin-
uous sensorimotor interactions involving the brain, body, and environ-
ment. The central metaphor for this approach is the mind as em-
bodied dynamic system in the world, rather than the mind as neural
network in the head.
As its name suggests, embodied dynamicism combines two main the-
oretical commitments. One commitment is to a dynamic systems ap-
proach to cognition, and the other is to an embodied approach to cog-
nition.
The central idea of the dynamic systems approach is that cognition is
an intrinsically temporal phenomenon and accordingly needs to be un-
derstood from the perspective of dynamic systems theory (Port and van
Gelder 1995; van Gelder 1998). A dynamic systems model takes the form
of a set of evolution equations that describe how the state of the system
changes over time. The collection of all possible states of the system cor-
responds to the system's "state space" or "phase space," and the ways that
the system changes state correspond to trajectories in this space.
Dynamic-system explanations focus on the internal and external forces
that shape such trajectories as they unfold in time. Inputs are described
as perturbations to the system's intrinsic dynamics, rather than as in-
structions to be followed, and internal states are described as self-
organized compensations triggered by perturbations, rather than as rep-
resentations of external states of affairs.
The central idea of the embodied approach is that cognition is the ex-
ercise of skillful know-how in situated and embodied action (Varela,
Thompson, and Rosch 1991). Cognitive structures and processes emerge
from recurrent sensorimotor patterns that govern perception and action
in autonomous and situated agents. Cognition as skillful know-how is not
reducible to prespeciﬁed problem solving, because the cognitive system
both poses the problems and speciﬁes what actions need to be taken for
their solution.
Strictly speaking, dynamicism and embodiment are logically in-
dependent theoretical commitments. For example, dynamical connec-
tionism incorporates dynamicist ideas into artiﬁcial neural networks
(see Port and van Gelder 1995, pp. 32-34), whereas autonomous
agents research in robotics incorporates embodiment ideas without
employing dynamic systems theory (Maes 1990). Nevertheless, dynam-
icism and embodiment go well together and are intimately related for

12
The Enactive Approach
many theorists. As Randall Beer notes: "Although a dynamical ap-
proach can certainly stand alone, it is most powerful and distinctive
when coupled with a situated, embodied perspective on cognition"
(Beer 2000, p. 97).
Embodied dynamicism provides a different perspective on the cog-
nitive unconscious from computationalism. No longer is the cognitive
unconscious seen as disembodied symbol manipulation or pattern
recognition separate from emotion and motor action in the world. In-
stead, the cognitive unconscious consists of those processes of em-
bodied and embedded cognition and emotion that cannot be made
experientially accessible to the person. This characterization of the
cognitive unconscious is offered not as a hypothetical construct in an
abstract functionalist model of the mind, but rather as a provisional in-
dication of a large problem-space in our attempt to understand
human cognition.
At least four points need emphasizing in this context. First, as a con-
ceptual matter, the relations among what is nonconscious, uncon-
scious, preconscious, and conscious (in any of the innumerable senses
of these words)—or in a different, but not equivalent idiom, what is
subpersonal and personal—remain far from clear. Second, as an em-
pirical matter, the scope and limits of awareness of one's own psycho-
logical and somatic processes have yet to be clearly mapped and un-
doubtedly vary across subjects. Third, the key point still stands that
most of what we are as psychological and biological beings is in some
sense unconscious. It follows that subjectivity cannot be understood
without situating it in relation to these unconscious structures and pro-
cesses. Finally, these unconscious structures and processes, including
those describable as cognitive and emotional, extend throughout the
body and loop through the material, social, and cultural environments
in which the body is embedded; they are not limited to neural pro-
cesses inside the skull.
The emergence of embodied dynamicism in the 1990s coincided
with a revival of scientiﬁc and philosophical interest in consciousness,
together with a renewed willingness to address the explanatory gap be-
tween scientiﬁc accounts of cognitive processes and human subjectivity
and experience. A number of works on embodied cognition were ex-
plicitly concerned with experience and challenged the objectivist as-
sumptions of computationalism.7 Some of these works were also ex-

Cognitive Science and Human Experience
13
plicitly dynamical in orientation.8 In particular, the enactive approach
of Varela, Thompson, and Rosch (1991) aimed to build bridges be-
tween embodied dynamicist accounts of the mind and phenomeno-
logical accounts of human subjectivity and experience. The present
book continues this project.
The Enactive Approach
Enaction means the action of enacting a law, but it also connotes the
performance or carrying out of an action more generally. Borrowing
the words of the poet Antonio Machado, Varela described enaction
as the laying down of a path in walking: "Wanderer the road is your
footsteps, nothing else; you lay down a path in walking" (Varela 1987,
p. 63).
The term the enactive approach and the associated concept of enac-
tion were introduced into cognitive science by Varela, Thompson, and
Rosch (1991) in their book The Embodied Mind. They aimed to unify
under one heading several related ideas. The ﬁrst idea is that living be-
ings are autonomous agents that actively generate and maintain them-
selves, and thereby also enact or bring forth their own cognitive do-
mains. The second idea is that the nervous system is an autonomous
dynamic system: It actively generates and maintains its own coherent
and meaningful patterns of activity, according to its operation as a cir-
cular and reentrant network of interacting neurons. The nervous
system does not process information in the computationalist sense, but
creates meaning. The third idea is that cognition is the exercise of
skillful know-how in situated and embodied action. Cognitive struc-
tures and processes emerge from recurrent sensorimotor patterns of
perception and action. Sensorimotor coupling between organism and
environment modulates, but does not determine, the formation of en-
dogenous, dynamic patterns of neural activity, which in turn inform
sensorimotor coupling. The fourth idea is that a cognitive being's
world is not a prespeciﬁed, external realm, represented internally by
its brain, but a relational domain enacted or brought forth by that
being's autonomous agency and mode of coupling with the environ-
ment. The ﬁfth idea is that experience is not an epiphenomenal side
issue, but central to any understanding of the mind, and needs to be
investigated in a careful phenomenological manner. For this reason,

14
The Enactive Approach
the enactive approach maintains that mind science and phenomeno-
logical investigations of human experience need to be pursued in a
complementary and mutually informing way.9
The conviction motivating the present book is that the enactive ap-
proach offers important resources for making progress on the ex-
planatory gap. One key point is that the enactive approach explicates
selfhood and subjectivity from the ground up by accounting for the au-
tonomy proper to living and cognitive beings. The burden of this book
is to show that this approach to subjectivity is a fruitful one.
To make headway on this project, we need to draw from biology,
neuroscience, psychology, philosophy, and phenomenology. In this
book, I try to integrate investigations from all these ﬁelds.
One common thread running through the following chapters is a re-
liance on the philosophical tradition of phenomenology, inaugurated
by Edmund Husserl and developed in various directions by numerous
others, most notably for my purposes by Maurice Merleau-Ponty
(Moran 2000; Sokolowski 2000; Spiegelberg 1994).10 My aim, however,
is not to repeat this tradition's analyses, as they are found in this or that
author or text, but to present them anew in light of present-day con-
cerns in the sciences of mind. Thus this book can be seen as con-
tributing to the work of a new generation of phenomenologists who
strive to "naturalize" phenomenology (Petitot et al. 1999). The project
of naturalizing phenomenology can be understood in different ways,
and my own way of thinking about it will emerge later in this book. The
basic idea for the moment is that it is not enough for phenomenology
simply to describe and philosophically analyze lived experience; phe-
nomenology needs to be able to understand and interpret its investiga-
tions in relation to those of biology and mind science.
Yet mind science has much to learn from the analyses of lived expe-
rience accomplished by phenomenologists. Indeed, once science
turns its attention to subjectivity and consciousness, to experience as it
is lived, then it cannot do without phenomenology, which thus needs
to be recognized and cultivated as an indispensable partner to the ex-
perimental sciences of mind and life. As we will see, this scientiﬁc turn
to phenomenology leads as much to a renewed understanding of na-
ture, life, and mind as to a naturalization of phenomenology (Zahavi
2004b).
There is also a deeper convergence of the enactive approach and

Cognitive Science and Human Experience
15
phenomenology that is worth summarizing brieﬂy here. Both share a
view of the mind as having to constitute its objects. Here constitution
does not mean fabrication or creation; the mind does not fabricate the
world. "To constitute," in the technical phenomenological sense,
means to bring to awareness, to present, or to disclose. The mind
brings things to awareness; it discloses and presents the world. Stated
in a classical phenomenological way, the idea is that objects are dis-
closed or made available to experience in the ways they are thanks to
the intentional activities of consciousness. Things show up, as it were,
having the features they do, because of how they are disclosed and
brought to awareness by the intentional activities of our minds. Such
constitution is not apparent to us in everyday life but requires system-
atic analysis to disclose. Consider our experience of time (discussed in
Chapter 11). Our sense of the present moment as both simultaneously
opening into the immediate future and slipping away into the imme-
diate past depends on the formal structure of our consciousness of
time. The present moment manifests as a zone or span of actuality, in-
stead of as an instantaneous ﬂash, thanks to the way our consciousness
is structured. As we will see later, the present moment also manifests
this way because of the nonlinear dynamics of brain activity. Weaving
together these two types of analysis, the phenomenological and neuro-
biological, in order to bridge the gap between subjective experience
and biology, deﬁnes the aim of neurophenomenology (Varela 1996),
an offshoot of the enactive approach.
The enactive approach and phenomenology also meet on the
common ground of life or living being. For the enactive approach, au-
tonomy is a fundamental characteristic of biological life, and there is a
deep continuity of life and mind. For phenomenology, intentionality is
a fundamental characteristic of the lived body. The enactive approach
and phenomenology thus converge on the proposition that subjec-
tivity and consciousness have to be explicated in relation to the au-
tonomy and intentionality of life, in a full sense of "life" that encom-
passes, as we will see, the organism, one's subjectively lived body, and
the life-world.
It will take some work before these ideas can stand clearly before us
in this book. In the next chapter I introduce phenomenological phi-
losophy in more detail, before returning to the enactive approach in
Chapter 3.

THIS CHAPTER INTRODUCES a number of themes from phenomeno-
logical philosophy that will appear throughout this book. Phenome-
nology is important here for two main reasons. First, any attempt to
gain a comprehensive understanding of the human mind must at
some point consider consciousness and subjectivity—how thinking,
perceiving, acting, and feeling are experienced in one's own case.
Mental events do not occur in a vacuum; they are lived by someone.
Phenomenology is anchored to the careful description, analysis, and
interpretation of lived experience. Second, the enactive approach
puts the organism and the body center-stage in mind science, but the
human body, unless it is dead, is always the lived body. Phenome-
nology, in one of its strongest currents ﬂowing from Husserl and
Merleau-Ponty, is a philosophy of the lived body. For these reasons,
phenomenology can guide and clarify scientiﬁc research on subjec-
tivity and consciousness, and provide a philosophical framework for
assessing the meaning and signiﬁcance of this research for our self-
understanding.
This chapter has two purposes. First, it introduces some core ideas
of Husserl's phenomenology, in particular the phenomenological
method of investigating the structure of experience, known as the phe-
nomenological reduction, and the phenomenological concept of in-
tentionality. Second, it sketches three phases of phenomenology,
known as static, genetic, and generative phenomenology.
Static phenomenology analyzes the formal structures of conscious-
16
T W O
N  N  N
The Phenomenological Connection

The Phenomenological Connection
17
ness, whereby consciousness is able to constitute (disclose or bring to
awareness) its objects. Static phenomenology takes these intentional
structures and their correlative objects as given and analyzes them stat-
ically or synchronically.
Genetic phenomenology is concerned with how these intentional
structures and objects emerge through time; therefore, it cannot take
them as given. Instead, it analyzes how certain types of experience mo-
tivate later and more complex types—for example, how implicit and
prereﬂective experiences motivate attentive and reﬂective experi-
ences. From the perspective of genetic phenomenology, experience
has a sedimented structure, and the process of sedimentation needs to
be understood in relation to the lived body and time-consciousness.
Some of the key guiding phenomena for genetic phenomenology—af-
fect, motivation, attention, habit—are familiar from the perspective of
mind science, especially developmental psychology, emotion theory,
and affective-cognitive neuroscience. These points of convergence and
mutual illumination will be taken up in later chapters.
Whereas time-consciousness and the lived body are the guiding
threads for genetic phenomenology, for generative phenomenology
the guiding thread is the life-world. The subject matter of generative
phenomenology is the cultural, historical, and intersubjective constitu-
tion of our human world. The importance of generative phenome-
nology for mind science and the enactive approach in particular will
be taken up in the last chapter of this book.
Phenomenology with an Attitude
Phenomenology, in its original Husserlian inspiration, grows out of
the recognition that we can adopt in our own ﬁrst-person case
different mental attitudes or stances toward the world, life, and experi-
ence. In everyday life we are usually straightforwardly immersed in var-
ious situations and projects, whether as specialists in scientiﬁc, tech-
nical, or practical knowledge or as colleagues, friends, and members of
families and communities. Besides being directed toward these more-
or-less particular, "thematic" matters, we are also directed at the world
as an unthematic horizon of all our activity (Husserl 1970, p. 281).
Husserl calls this attitude of being straightforwardly immersed in the
world "the natural attitude," and he thinks it is characterized by a kind

18
The Enactive Approach
of unreﬂective "positing" of the world as something existing "out
there" more or less independently of us.
In contrast, the "phenomenological attitude," arises when we step
back from the natural attitude, not to deny it, but in order to investi-
gate the very experiences it comprises. If such an investigation is to be
genuinely philosophical, then it must strive to be critical and not dog-
matic, and therefore it cannot take the naïve realism of the natural at-
titude for granted. Yet to deny this realistic attitude would be equally
dogmatic. Rather, the realistic positing of the natural attitude must be
suspended, neutralized, or put to one side, so that it plays no role in
the investigation. In this way, we can focus on the experiences that sus-
tain and animate the natural attitude, but in an open and nondog-
matic manner. We can investigate experience in the natural attitude
without being prejudiced by an unexamined view of things, which is
characteristic of the natural attitude.
Yet how exactly is such an investigation to proceed? What exactly are
we supposed to investigate? Husserl's answer is that our attention
should be directed toward the world strictly as we experience it. We are
to attend to the world strictly as it appears and as it is phenomenally
manifest. Put another way, we should attend to the modes or ways in
which things appear to us. We thereby attend to things strictly as cor-
relates of our experience, and the focus of our investigation becomes
the correlational structure of our subjectivity and the appearance or
disclosure of the world.
The philosophical procedure by which this correlational structure is
investigated is known as the phenomenological reduction. "Reduction" in
this context does not mean replacing or eliminating one theory or
model in favor of another taken to be more fundamental. It signiﬁes
rather a "leading back" (reducere) or redirection of thought away from
its unreﬂective and unexamined immersion in the world to the way in
which the world appears to us. To redirect our interest in this way does
not mean we doubt the things before us or that we somehow try to
turn away from the world to look elsewhere. Things remain before us,
but we envisage them in a new way, namely, strictly as experienced.
Thus, everyday things available for our perception are not doubted or
considered as illusions when they are "phenomenologically reduced,"
but instead are envisaged and examined simply and precisely as per-
ceived. Remembered things are examined strictly and precisely as re-
membered, imagined things as imagined. In other words, once we adopt

The Phenomenological Connection
19
the phenomenological attitude, we are interested not in what things
are in some naïve, mind-independent or theory-independent sense,
but rather in exactly how they are experienced, and thus as strict rela-
tional correlates of our subjectivity.1
As a procedure of working back from the what to the how of experi-
ence, the phenomenological reduction has to be performed in the
ﬁrst person. As is true of any such procedure, it is one thing to describe
its general theoretical character and another to describe it pragmati-
cally, the concrete steps by which it is carried out. The main method-
ical step crucial for the phenomenological reduction Husserl called
the epoché. This term derives from Greek skepticism, where it means to
suspend or refrain from judgment, but Husserl adopted it as a term for
the "suspension," "neutralization," or "bracketing" of both our natural
"positing" attitude and our theoretical beliefs and assertions (whether
scientiﬁc or philosophical) about "objective reality." From a more em-
bodied and situated, ﬁrst-person perspective, however, the epoché can
be described as the ﬂexible and trainable mental skill of being able
both to suspend one's inattentive immersion in experience and to
turn one's attention to the manner in which something appears or is
given to experience (Depraz 1999b; Depraz, Varela, and Vermersch
2000; Steinbock 2004). Suspending one's inattentive immersion in ex-
perience implies the capacity to notice such immersion, and thus im-
plies what psychologists call meta-awareness (awareness of awareness).
Being able to redirect one's attention to the manner in which some-
thing appears implies ﬂexibility of attention; in particular it implies
being able voluntarily to shift one's attention and stabilize or sustain it
on a given mode of presentation. The ultimate aim is not to break the
ﬂow of experience, but to reinhabit it in a fresh way, namely, with
heightened awareness and attunement.2
Within the phenomenological tradition one can discern a certain
ambivalence regarding these theoretical and practical or existential di-
mensions of the epoché. On the one hand, Husserl's great concern
was to establish phenomenology as a new philosophical foundation for
science; thus for him the epoché served largely as a critical tool of the-
oretical reason.3 On the other hand, because Husserl's theoretical
project was based on a radical reappraisal of experience as the source
of meaning and knowledge, it necessitated a constant return to the pa-
tient, analytic description of lived experience through phenomenolog-
ical reduction. This impulse generated a huge corpus of careful phe-

20
The Enactive Approach
nomenological analyses of human experience—the perceptual experi-
ence of space (Husserl 1997), kinesthesis and the experience of one's
own body (Husserl 1989, 1997), time-consciousness (Husserl 1991),
affect (Husserl 2001), judgment (Husserl 1975), imagination and
memory (Husserl 2006), and intersubjectivity (Husserl 1973), to name
just a few.
Nevertheless, the epoché as a practical procedure—as a situated
practice carried out in the ﬁrst person by the phenomenologist—has
remained strangely neglected in the phenomenological literature,
even by so-called existential phenomenologists such as Heidegger and
Merleau-Ponty. They instead took up and then recast in their own ways
the method of the phenomenological reduction (see Heidegger 1982,
pp.19-23; Merleau-Ponty 1962, pp. xi-xiv). For this reason, one new
current in phenomenology aims to develop more explicitly the prag-
matics of the epoché as a ﬁrst-person method for investigating con-
sciousness (Depraz 1999b; Depraz, Varela, and Vermersch, 2000, 2003;
Varela and Shear 1999b). This pragmatic approach also involves com-
paring the epoché to ﬁrst-person methods in other domains, especially
Buddhist philosophy and contemplative mental training (Depraz,
Varela, and Vermersch, 2003; Lutz, Dunne, and Davidson, 2007). In
addition, it explores the relevance of ﬁrst-person methods for pro-
ducing more reﬁned ﬁrst-person reports in experimental psychology
and cognitive neuroscience (Lutz and Thompson 2003). This en-
deavor is central to the research program known as neurophenome-
nology, introduced by Francisco Varela (1996) and discussed exten-
sively later in this book.
Let us return to the phenomenological reduction in its original
philosophical context. Here the reduction, in its full sense, is a rich
mode of analysis, comprising two main steps. The ﬁrst step leads back
from the natural attitude to the phenomenological attitude by neu-
tralizing the realistic positing of the natural attitude and then ori-
enting attention toward the disclosure or appearance of reality to us
(this step corresponds to the epoché). The second step leads from this
phenomenological attitude to a more radical kind of philosophical at-
titude. More precisely, this step leads from phenomenology as an em-
pirical and psychological attitude (phenomenological psychology) to
phenomenology as a transcendental philosophical attitude (transcen-
dental phenomenology).

The Phenomenological Connection
21
The term transcendental is used here in its Kantian sense to mean an
investigation concerned with the modes or ways in which objects are
experienced and known, and with the a priori conditions for the possi-
bility of such experience and knowledge. Husserl casts these two as-
pects of transcendental inquiry in a speciﬁc form that is clearly related
to but nonetheless different from Kant's (see Steinbock 1995, pp. 12-
15). First, transcendental phenomenology focuses not on what things
are but on the ways in which things are given. For Husserl, this means fo-
cusing on phenomena (appearances) and the senses or meanings they
have for us, and then asking how these meaningful phenomena are
constituted (brought to awareness). Second, to address this constitu-
tional problem, transcendental phenomenology tries to uncover the
essential formal laws under which experience necessarily operates in
order to constitute a meaningful world.
In the natural attitude, reality is taken for granted as being simply
there without any active engagement on the part of consciousness. In
other words, there is no thought that reality involves acts or processes
of constitution. Grasped phenomenologically, in the transcendental
phenomenological attitude, reality is that which is disclosed to us as
real, whether in everyday perception or scientiﬁc investigation, and
such disclosure is an achievement of consciousness. The point here is
not that the world would not exist if not for consciousness. Rather, it is
that we have no grip on what reality means apart from what is disclosed
to us as real, and such disclosure necessarily involves the intentional
activity of consciousness. The point of the transcendental phenome-
nological reduction is to gain access to this activity and the constitu-
tional role it plays.
It is often said that whereas Husserl's orientation is transcendental in
this way, Heidegger and Merleau-Ponty reject the transcendental stand-
point and identify the constitutional structures unearthed by phenom-
enology with existential structures of "being-in-the-world." (The hy-
phens indicate that "being," "in," and "world" are not ontologically
separable, but form one irreducible and uniﬁed structure.) But this in-
terpretation is simplistic. First, both Heidegger's "Dasein" (his term for
individual human existence) and Merleau-Ponty's "lived body" (a con-
cept that comes straight from Husserl) are transcendental in the rele-
vant sense, for they are ways of characterizing that which makes pos-
sible the disclosure or manifestation of the world as meaningful.

22
The Enactive Approach
Second, although Husserl in the most well-known portions of his work
(the writings published in his lifetime) did focus largely on the consti-
tutional structures of "egological" consciousness (consciousness at the
level of the individual reﬂective "I" or "ego"), recent scholarship indi-
cates that these analyses are not fully representative of his mature
philosophical investigations.4 As his thought developed, he greatly ex-
panded his investigations, analyzing constitutional structures be-
longing to the "nonegological" (or "pre-egological") depths of the lived
body, time-consciousness, and intersubjectivity, as well as the terrain of
historical and cultural life.5 The point here is more than an interpretive
or textual one; it is philosophical. Transcendental phenomenology
cannot be limited to—and indeed goes far beyond—a philosophy of
"egological" consciousness or subjectivity. "Transcendental" signiﬁes a
radical attitude, one that aims to regress back to the very roots (condi-
tions of possibility) of our experience of a meaningful world. These
roots ramify far beyond individual consciousness into the depths of our
lived bodies and out into our social and cultural worlds.
The remainder of this chapter sketches a few of these developments
of phenomenological thought. My aim is not to give a detailed schol-
arly account of any particular aspect of phenomenology, but to set
forth some themes and ideas important for the chapters to come.
Intentionality
A good place to begin is the phenomenological doctrine of the inten-
tionality of consciousness. According to phenomenology, conscious-
ness is intentional, in the sense that it "aims toward" or "intends" some-
thing beyond itself. This sense of intentional should not be confused
with the more familiar sense of having a purpose in mind when one
acts, which is only one kind of intentionality in the phenomenological
sense. Rather, intentionality is a generic term for the pointing-beyond-
itself proper to consciousness. (It comes from the Latin intendere,
which once referred to drawing a bow and aiming at a target.)
Phenomenologists distinguish different types of intentionality. In a
narrow sense, they deﬁne intentionality as object-directedness. In a
broader sense, they deﬁne it as openness to the world or what is
"other" ("alterity"). In either case, the emphasis is on denying that
consciousness is self-enclosed.6

The Phenomenological Connection
23
Object-directed experiences are those in which we are conscious of
something in a more-or-less determinate sense. When we see, we see
something; when we remember, we remember something; when we
hope or fear, we hope for or fear something. These kinds of "transitive
consciousness" are characterized by the intending of an object (which
need not exist). "Object" in its etymological sense means something
that stands before us. Something standing before us lies beyond, over
against, or outside of us. Object-directed experiences can thus be un-
derstood as experiences in which we are conscious of something dis-
tinct from ourselves as a present subject, whether it be a past event re-
membered, something perceived in the settings around us, a future
event feared or hoped for, something imagined, and so on.
Many kinds of everyday experience, however, are not object-directed
in this sense. Such experiences include bodily feelings of pain, moods
such as undirected anxiety, depression, and elation, and absorbed
skillful activity in everyday life. These experiences are not or need not
be "about" any intentional object. They are not directed toward a tran-
scendent object, in the sense of something experienced as standing
over against oneself as a distinct subject. Put another way, they do not
have a clear subject-object structure.7
Philosophers who think of intentionality simply as object-directedness
would deny that experiences like these are intentional. Nevertheless,
such experiences do qualify as intentional in the broader phenomeno-
logical sense of being open to what is other or having a world-involving
character. Thus bodily feelings are not self-enclosed without openness to
the world. On the contrary, they present things in a certain affective
light or atmosphere and thereby deeply inﬂuence how we perceive and
respond to things. A classic example is Sartre's discussion of feeling eye-
strain and fatigue as a result of reading late into the night (1956, pp.
332-333).8 The feeling ﬁrst manifests itself not as an intentional object
of transitive consciousness but as a trembling of the eyes and a blurriness
of the words on the page. One's body and immediate environment dis-
close themselves in a certain manner through this feeling. In the case of
moods, although they are not object-directed in the same way inten-
tional emotions are—such as a feeling of sympathy for a loved one or a
feeling of envy for a rival—they are nonetheless hardly self-enclosed
without reference to the world. On the contrary, as Heidegger analyzes
at length in Being and Time, moods reveal our embeddedness in the

24
The Enactive Approach
world and (as he sees it) make possible more circumscribed forms of di-
rectedness in everyday life. Finally, in absorbed skillful activities, such as
driving, dancing, or writing, one's experience is not that of relating to a
distinct intentional object but of being engaged and immersed in a ﬂuid
activity. Such experience takes on a subject-object structure only during
moments of breakdown or disruption (see Dreyfus 1991, 2002; Dreyfus
and Dreyfus 1986).
In phenomenology, intentional experiences are described as mental
acts—acts of perceiving, remembering, imagining, empathizing, and
so on. Phenomenology conceives of mental life as a temporally ex-
tended and dynamic process of ﬂowing intentional acts. These acts are
animated by precognitive habits and sensibilities of the lived body. In-
tentional acts are performances of a person, a living bodily subject of
experience, whose cognitive and affective life is constituted by com-
munal norms, conventions, and historical traditions. Mental life is ani-
mated by an intentional striving that aims toward and ﬁnds satisfaction
in disclosure of the intentional object. In this way, intentionality is tele-
ological (Held 2003, p. 14).
Given this conception of intentionality, it follows that neither the
mental act nor that which it intends can be understood in isolation.
Every mental act is the very act it is in virtue of that which it intends,
and every object is constituted in and through the temporally ex-
tended course of intentional experience. As Donn Welton explains:
There is a genuinely new conception of mental acts here in play . . . On
the one hand, acts do not belong to a closed interior realm available
only to introspection. Rather, they have their being by virtue of their re-
lationship to that which transcends them. On the other hand, the de-
terminations of "the given" can be fully clariﬁed only by seeing them in
relation to certain acts that contribute to their conﬁguration. It is nei-
ther the subject nor the object but the relationship that is primary.
(Welton 2000, p. 17)
Phenomenologists call this relation the correlational structure of in-
tentionality. "Correlational" does not mean the constant conjunction
of two terms that could be imagined to exist apart; rather, it refers to
the invariant structure of intentional act/intentional object. Object-
directed intentional experiences necessarily comprise these two insep-
arable poles. In Husserlian phenomenological language, these two

The Phenomenological Connection
25
poles are known as the "noema" (the object in its givenness) and the
"noesis" (the mental act that intends and discloses the object in a cer-
tain manner).9
We need to keep this framework in mind when we think about the
relation between the phenomenological conception of intentionality
and what philosophers of mind today call mental representation. In a
broad and theoretically neutral sense, a mental representation is sup-
posed to be a mental structure (concept, thought, image) with se-
mantic properties (content, truth conditions, reference), or a state or
process involving such a structure. Usually, a mental representation is
not considered to be an object of cognition or awareness, but rather
that by which one cognizes or is aware of something in the world.
Many phenomenologists would agree that intentional experience is
representational in this broad sense of having descriptive content—
that in intentional experience the world is represented in some partic-
ular way or other. Nevertheless, the phenomenological conception of
intentional experience has certain other distinctive features. First, in
phenomenology, as mentioned earlier, intentional experiences are
conceptualized not as states having content but as acts having directedness.
These two conceptions are not necessarily incompatible, but their the-
oretical orientation and emphasis are different. Second, "re-presenta-
tion," in its technical phenomenological sense, applies only to certain
types of intentional acts, namely, those that mentally evoke or bring to
presence something that is not present in its bodily being.
Phenomenologists thus draw a crucial distinction between inten-
tional acts of presentation (Gegenwärtigung) and of re-presentation (Verge-
genwärtigung) (see Marbach 1993). On the one hand, perceptual ex-
perience is presentational: in this type of experience the object is
given as present in its very being. In memory or imagination, on the
other hand, the object imagined or remembered is not given as
present in its very being, but rather as both phenomenally absent and
as mentally evoked or called forth. In this way, memory and imagina-
tion are said to be re-presentational. Note that the deﬁnitive feature
of re-presentational experience is that the object is given as absent
and as mentally evoked, but not necessarily as re-evoked or called
forth again. Re-evoking belongs to memory but not necessarily to vi-
sualizing or fantasizing. Note also that re-presentational experiences
do not ﬂoat freely, as it were, but arise in relation to ongoing presen-

26
The Enactive Approach
tational experiences of one's surroundings. I discuss this phenomeno-
logical conception of mental re-presentation in connection with
mental imagery in Chapter 10.
Let us return to the connection between phenomenology and the
enactive approach. As we will see in Chapter 3, the main explanatory
tool of the enactive approach is the theory of self-organizing and au-
tonomous dynamic systems. Such systems bring forth or enact
meaning in continuous reciprocal interaction with their environ-
ments. "Inner" and "outer" are not preexisting separate spheres, but
mutually specifying domains enacted or brought forth by the struc-
tural coupling of the system and its environment. This subpersonal ac-
count of cognitive systems echoes the personal-level account of the
correlational structure of intentionality.10 As Jean-Pierre Dupuy writes
in his philosophical history of cognitive science, discussing the "missed
encounter" between phenomenology and mind science in the cyber-
netic era:
A given [autonomous] network usually possesses a multiplicity of self-
behaviors (or, as they are sometimes called, "attractors" . . . ) and con-
verges toward one or another of them depending on the initial condi-
tions of the network. The "life" of a network can thus be conceived as a
trajectory through a "landscape" of attractors, passing from one to an-
other as a result of perturbations or shocks from the external world.
Note that these external events come to acquire meaning in the context
of the network as a result of the network's own activity: the content—the
meaning—that the network attributes to them is precisely the self-
behavior, or attractor that results from them. Obviously, then, this con-
tent is purely endogenous and not the reﬂection of some external
"transcendent" objectivity.
It should be obvious, too, that this line of argument . . . provides us
with at least the germ of a very satisfactory model of what Brentano
called "immanent objectivity" . . . The attractor is an entity that both
fully participates in the activity of the network and yet in some sense, by
virtue of the fact that it results from a higher level of logical complexity,
transcends the activity of the network. The dynamics of the network
may therefore be said to tend toward an attractor, although the latter is
only a product of these dynamics. The network is thus an intentional
creature in Brentano and Husserl's sense. Systems theory was to coin

The Phenomenological Connection
27
another term to describe this paradoxical relationship between the dy-
namics of a system and its attractor, referring to it as "autotranscen-
dence." This is not very different, really, from Husserl's notion of "tran-
scendence within immanence." (Dupuy 2000, pp. 104-105)
Because this notion of transcendence-within-immanence is often
misunderstood, it bears clariﬁcation here. It does not mean that what
appears to be beyond or outside the sphere of mental activity is really
contained within the mind (in some idealist or internalist sense).
Rather, the crucial point is that the transcendent is given as such by
virtue of the intentional activities of consciousness. Thus it falls
within the sphere of what is phenomenologically constituted (dis-
closed or brought to awareness by consciousness). Clearly, this point
makes sense only at a transcendental level, for at this level the tran-
scendent is understood as a mode of givenness or disclosure (one char-
acterizing things in the world, but not one's own consciousness).
Thus, at a transcendental level, what is really or genuinely transcendent
is also phenomenologically immanent (see Crowell, in press, for further
discussion).
The correspondence between phenomenology and dynamic systems
theory to which Dupuy is pointing should therefore be understood as
follows. External events are really transcendent, for they are certainly not
contained within the system, nor are they a mere product of what goes
inside the system. Nevertheless, they are intentionally immanent, in the
following sense: they do not arrive already labeled, as it were, as ex-
ternal events; instead they are constituted or disclosed as such, and
with the signiﬁcance they have, by virtue of the network's autonomous
(self-organizing) dynamics. In other words, their status as external
events for the system (as opposed to their status for an observer of the
system) is a function of the system's own activity. Their meaning or sig-
niﬁcance corresponds to an attractor of the system's dynamics (a re-
current pattern of activity toward which the system tends), which itself
is an emergent product of that very dynamics. The external world is
constituted as such for the system by virtue of the system's self-
organizing activity. Dupuy's proposal, in a nutshell, is that constitutional
intentionality corresponds to a kind of self-organization. This proposal, as we
will see in later chapters, is one of the key guiding intuitions of the en-
active approach and neurophenomenology.

28
The Enactive Approach
From Static to Genetic Phenomenology
This convergence between phenomenology and the enactive ap-
proach can be taken further. The correlational structure of intention-
ality belongs to what Husserl called static phenomenology. As his
thought progressed, however, Husserl found that he needed to articu-
late a genetic phenomenology, that is, a phenomenology whose point of
departure is not the explicit correlational structure of intentional act
(noesis) and intentional object (noema), but rather the genesis of in-
tentional experience in time. From the standpoint of genetic phenom-
enology, we need to account for the correlational structure of inten-
tionality developmentally by understanding how it emerges from
inarticulate experience that does not have a clear subject-object struc-
ture. One wellspring of this kind of experience is the lived body (Leib);
another is time-consciousness. The shift from static to genetic phe-
nomenology thus marks a turn toward the lived body and time-
consciousness. Thus it enables us to deepen the connection between
phenomenology and the enactive approach.
Static phenomenology makes use of two methodological strategies
(Steinbock 1995, pp. 38-39). The ﬁrst is static analysis or the analysis
of invariant formal structures of experience, such as the correlational
structure of intentionality, or the difference between presentational
and re-presentational mental acts and the ways the latter presuppose
the former. The second strategy is constitutional analysis—the analysis
of how things are disclosed or brought to awareness by virtue of the in-
tentional activities of consciousness. From a transcendental perspec-
tive, the invariant formal structures of experience uncovered by static
analysis are precisely the essential formal laws under which experience
necessarily operates in order to constitute its objects. An example is
Husserl's investigation in his 1907 lectures, "Thing and Space," of the
conditions of possibility for the perceptual experience of things in
space (Husserl 1997). Husserl shows that visual perception depends
constitutively on certain invariant functional interdependencies be-
tween visual sensation and the experience of moving one's body
(which he calls kinesthesis). These analyses anticipate recent enactive
or dynamic sensorimotor accounts of perception (discussed in
Chapter 9). According to these accounts, to perceive is to exercise
one's skillful mastery of the ways sensory stimulation varies as a result
of bodily movement (Noë 2004; O'Regan and Noë 2001a).

The Phenomenological Connection
29
Unlike static phenomenology, genetic phenomenology does not
take the already disclosed intentional object as its point of departure,
nor is it content to stay at the level of analyzing formal and constitutive
structures of experience. Instead, it investigates the genesis and devel-
opment of those structures themselves. After all, we do not simply
drop into the world and open our eyes and see. What we see is a func-
tion of how we see, and how we see is a function of previous experi-
ence. For genetic phenomenology, what we experience is not a ﬁxed
given but something that has come to be given—something emergent—
out of previous experience (Bernet, Kern, and Marbach 1993, pp.
200-201). In Chapters 11 and 12, I discuss phenomenological analyses
of time-consciousness and affect produced from this genetic orienta-
tion and relate them to research in psychology and neuroscience.
Genetic phenomenology also brings with it a different way of
thinking about the conscious subject. From a static viewpoint, the "I" is
thought of as a kind of "ego-pole" of the noetic-noematic structure, in
contraposition to the "object-pole."11 A fuller articulation of the corre-
lational structure of intentionality would thus be [ego] noesis-noema
(I intend the intentional object). From a genetic standpoint, however,
this way of thinking remains abstract because it ignores the temporal
development and individuation of the subject. The "I" or "ego" is not a
mere "empty pole" of selfhood in experience but a concrete subject
having habits, interests, convictions, and capabilities as a result of ac-
cumulated experience. In other words, the subject has to be seen as
having a "life" in all the rich senses of this word—as formed by its indi-
vidual history, as a living bodily subject of experience (Leib), and as be-
longing to an intersubjective "life-world" (Lebenswelt).
Genetic phenomenology distinguishes between active genesis and
passive genesis. In active genesis subjects play an active and deliberate,
productive role in the constitution of objects. The products of active
genesis are tools, artworks, scientiﬁc theories, experimental interven-
tions, logical judgments, mathematical propositions, and so on. Active
genesis, however, always presupposes a passivity by which one is affected
beforehand. It must be stressed that "passive" in this context does not
mean a state of inactivity, but rather a state of being involuntarily inﬂu-
enced and affected by something. In particular, it means being inﬂu-
enced and affected on an aesthetic level, in the original Greek sense of
aisthesis as sense perception, including especially the perception and
felt experience of what is attractive and unattractive. Thus the thought

30
The Enactive Approach
behind the active/passive distinction is that our active orientation
toward things in practical or theoretical reason, or artistic creation, pre-
supposes a deeper and more fundamental openness to the world. It is
an openness to being sensuously affected and solicited by the world
through the medium of our living body, and responding by attraction
and repulsion. Investigating these sensorimotor and affective depths of
experience leads phenomenology to the notion of passive genesis. In
passive genesis, the lived body constitutes itself and its surrounding en-
vironment through the involuntary formation of habits, motor pat-
terns, associations, dispositions, motivations, emotions, and memories.
At this level of "passive synthesis" in experience, the relevant notion
of intentionality is not so much object-directedness as openness to the
world, here in the bodily form of an implicit sensibility or sentience
that does not have any clear subject-object structure. Intentionality at
this level functions anonymously, involuntarily, spontaneously, and re-
ceptively. Husserl distinguishes between receptivity and affectivity
(2001, pp. 105, 127). As Dan Zahavi explains, "Receptivity is taken to
be the ﬁrst, lowest, and most primitive type of intentional activity, and
consists in responding to or paying attention to that which is affecting
us passively. Thus, even receptivity understood as a mere 'I notice' pre-
supposes a prior affection" (Zahavi 1999, p. 116; see also the Trans-
lator's Introduction to Husserl 2001). Affection here means being af-
fectively inﬂuenced or perturbed. The idea is that whatever comes into
relief in experience must have already been affecting us and must have
some kind of "affective force" or "affective allure" in relation to our at-
tention and motivations. Whatever exercises affective allure without
our turning to it attentively is said to be "pregiven," and whatever suc-
ceeds in gaining attention is said to be "given." Thus the given—the
mode or way in which something appears to object-directed conscious-
ness—has to be understood dynamically and teleologically as emer-
gent in relation to the pregiven. Object-directed intentional experi-
ences emerge out of the background of a precognitive "operative
intentionality" (Merleau-Ponty 1962, p. xviii) that involves a dynamic
interplay of affective sensibility, motivation, and attention. This affec-
tively "saturated intentionality" (Steinbock 1999) provides our primor-
dial openness to the world.
The phenomenological terrain of "passive synthesis" is rich in po-
tential for illuminating and being illuminated by research in psy-
chology and neuroscience on emotion and cognition. Some of these

The Phenomenological Connection
31
connections are already discernible in Husserl's description of passive
synthesis as operating according to a principle of association (Husserl
1960, pp. 80-81; 2001, pp. 162-242). For Husserl, association is an in-
tentional process whereby experiences are built up or synthesized into
larger, patterned wholes. Using the terminology of emergence, we
could say that association is the process by which coherent patterns of
experience emerge from conjoined and reciprocally affecting experi-
ences. Here are a few vivid examples given by William James in his
Principles of Psychology:
Let a person enter his room in the dark and grope among the objects
there. The touch of the matches will instantaneously recall their ap-
pearance. If his hand comes in contact with an orange on the table, the
golden yellow of the fruit, its savor and perfume will forthwith shoot
through his mind. In passing the hand over the sideboard or in jogging
the coal-scuttle with the foot, the large glossy dark shape of the one and
the irregular blackness of the other awaken in a ﬂash and constitute
what we call the recognition of objects. The voice of the violin faintly
echoes through the mind as the hand is laid upon it in the dark, and
the feeling of the garments or draperies which may hang about the
room is not understood till the look correlative to the feeling has in
each case been resuscitated . . . But the most notorious and important
case of the mental combination of auditory with optical impressions
originally experienced together is furnished by language. The child is
offered a new and delicious fruit and is at the same time told that it is
called a "ﬁg." Or looking out of the window he exclaims, "What a funny
horse!" and is told that it is a "piebald" horse. When learning his letters,
the sound of each is repeated to him whilst its shape is before his eye.
Thenceforward, long as he may live, he will never see a ﬁg, a piebald
horse, or a letter of the alphabet without the name which he ﬁrst heard
in conjunction with each clinging to it in his mind; and inversely he will
never hear the name without the faint arousal of the image of the ob-
ject. (1981, pp. 524-525)
According to the empiricist philosophers Locke and Hume, such as-
sociations happen in a completely mechanical way. Association oper-
ates as a kind of connective force in the mind that links impressions
and ideas simply in virtue of their simultaneous occurrence, proximity,
or repeated succession. Hume's analysis of causation provides a fa-
mous example of this way of thinking about association. Hume argued

32
The Enactive Approach
that causal connections are neither directly observable nor provable by
reason, but are objects of mere belief based on habit and custom. The
belief in a causal connection between A and B arises from the associa-
tion or "constant conjunction" of A and B in past experience: experi-
ences of A constantly conjoined to experiences of B make the mind ha-
bitually expect that the occurrence of A will be followed by the
occurrence of B.
For Husserl (and James), however, association is not meaningless
and mechanical, but thoroughly intentional. Association is not the me-
chanical aggregation of complex experiences out of preexisting
experience-atoms. Husserl, like James, completely rejects this atomistic
conception of experience. Like emergent processes in a self-organizing
system, associated experiences reciprocally strengthen and reinforce
each other and thereby give rise to new formations that supersede their
prior separateness. Association also involves the retention and anticipa-
tion of sense or meaning. Earlier experiences are affectively "awak-
ened" by later ones on the basis of their felt similarities, and they moti-
vate the anticipation that what is to come will cohere with the sense or
meaning of experience so far. In Husserl's terminology, there is an
"analogical transfer of sense" from earlier to later experience: what is
present now is passively apprehended within a sense that has its roots in
earlier experience and that has since become habitual (Bernet, Kern,
and Marbach 1993, p. 202).
The notion of habit is central to Husserl's conception of passive gen-
esis, as he states explicitly in a lecture from 1927: "As Hume correctly
teaches, habit is not only our nurse, rather it is the function of con-
sciousness that shapes and constantly further shapes the world"
(quoted by Bernet, Kern, and Marbach 1993, p. 203; see also Welton
2000, p. 243). Husserl mentions Hume, but the notion of habit was very
important to James as well. In his Principles of Psychology James declared
that habit is the ground of all association in the stream of consciousness
and in brain activity (thereby anticipating Donald Hebb and connec-
tionism).12 Later, in 1945, Merleau-Ponty introduced his notion of the
habit-body in his Phenomenology of Perception while discussing the experi-
ence of the phantom limb: "our body comprises as it were two distinct
layers, that of the habit-body and that of the body at this moment. In
the ﬁrst appear manipulatory movements which have disappeared from
the second, and the problem how I can have the sensation of still pos-

The Phenomenological Connection
33
sessing a limb which I no longer have amounts to ﬁnding out how the
habitual body can act as guarantee for the body at this moment" (1962,
p. 82). To say that the habitual body acts as guarantee for the body at
this moment is to say that one's lived body is a developmental being
thick with its own history and sedimented ways of feeling, perceiving,
acting, and imagining. These sedimented patterns are not limited to
the space enclosed by the body's membrane; they span and interweave
the lived body and its environment, thereby forming a unitary circuit of
lived-body-environment (Gallagher 1986b).
In Part III, I will explore this convergence of genetic phenome-
nology and enactive cognitive science in greater detail. For now let me
simply point out how important the dynamic coupling between one's
lived body and the surrounding world is to both perspectives. In this
coupling, the motivating undercurrent is the habitual and associative
linkage of affective, sensorimotor, and imaginative bodily experiences.
From Genetic to Generative Phenomenology
Late in his life Husserl began to move in still another direction—from
genetic phenomenology to generative phenomenology. Already in genetic
phenomenology intersubjectivity had arisen as an important theme, in
the form of the dynamic coupling between self and other on the basis
of their lived bodily presence to one another. Generative phenome-
nology, however, widened the scope of this genetic analysis beyond the
self-other relation to include the parameters of birth and death as well
as the interconnectedness of generations.
In this context, the term generative has a double meaning: it means
both the process of becoming and the process of occurring over the
generations (Steinbock 1995, p. 3). Generative phenomenology con-
cerns the historical, social, and cultural becoming of human experi-
ence. If static phenomenology is restricted in scope with respect to ge-
netic phenomenology, then genetic phenomenology is restricted in
scope with respect to generative phenomenology: the subject matter of
generative phenomenology is the historical and intersubjective be-
coming of human experience, whereas genetic phenomenology fo-
cuses on individual development without explicit analysis of its genera-
tional and historical embeddedness.
In shifting from a genetic to a generative register, the notion of the

34
The Enactive Approach
lived body is complemented with that of the life-world (Husserl 1970;
Steinbock 1995, pp. 86-122; Welton 2000, pp. 331-346). The life-world
is the everyday world in which we live. It is "always already pregiven,"
serving as the horizon of all our activities, practical and theoretical.
Two important aspects of this rich and multifaceted notion need to be
mentioned here—the back-and-forth circulation or exchange within
the life-world between empirical science and everyday human life, and
the life-world as the pregiven horizon and ground of all human ac-
tivity.
The life-world comprises the everyday world and the things that can
be directly experienced within the everyday world—our living bodies,
our natural surroundings, and our cultural creations (tools, artworks,
and so on). The life-world is subject-relative in the sense that it is rela-
tionally bound to human subjectivity. This is in contrast to "objective
nature" as conceived by science, which is arrived at through logical
and theoretical abstraction. Nature so construed is an objectiﬁcation
and has as its cognitive correlate the objectifying intentional attitude
adopted by a community of theorizing subjects. Objective nature presup-
poses the life-world as its evidential source and ground. In principle it
cannot be experienced directly because it is the product of abstraction
and idealization. Nevertheless, the propositions, models, logical con-
structs, and experimental techniques of the sciences are clearly experi-
enceable in another sense: they are human accomplishments that have
experiential validity for members of the scientiﬁc community, and
their effects ﬂow into the everyday world and become tangibly experi-
enced in the form of technology and social practice. Our life-world en-
compasses science, in addition to other spheres of experience such as
art, philosophy, and religion. Hence, there is a necessary "circulation"
between everyday experience and scientiﬁc experience (Varela,
Thompson, and Rosch 1991, pp. 10-14). On the one hand, everyday
experience provides the sensuous, material contents from which and
with which science must work. On the other hand, the scientiﬁc
analyses built from these contents contribute to the formation of our
life-world and provide important leading clues for phenomenological
analyses of how our experience of the world is genetically and genera-
tively constituted.
In taking up these phenomenological analyses, Husserl initially con-
ceived of the life-world as a synthetic totality. Hence he treated it on

The Phenomenological Connection
35
the model of an object, albeit a peculiar all-encompassing one (see
Steinbock 1995, pp. 98-102; Welton 2000, pp. 336-346). Eventually,
however, it became clear to him that the life-world cannot be given as
any kind of intentional object, for it is always already there, pregiven
rather than given.13 Thus, in a crucial and famous passage from his last
work, The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology
(1970, §37, pp. 142-143), he wrote that the world is always already
there, existing in advance for us, as the "ground" and "horizon" of any
human activity. He then asserted that the way we are conscious of the
world and the way we are conscious of things or objects, though insep-
arably united, are fundamentally different. We can be conscious of
things only as things within the world horizon, and we can be con-
scious of the world horizon only as a horizon for existing objects. Yet
the world is not any kind of entity, nor is it simply the totality of enti-
ties, precisely because it is the horizon presupposed by any entity or
any totality. It is tempting to say "the world is one," except that, as
Husserl puts it, the world "exists with such uniqueness that the plural
makes no sense when applied to it." In other words, the world is not
one in any sense in which it could have been two. To put it another
way, to describe the world as "unique," such that "every singular and
every plural drawn from it, presupposes the world horizon," means
that the notion of counting makes no sense or has no application
here.14 Given this difference between the manner in which any object
is given and the manner in which the world horizon is given (namely,
as always already pregiven), it follows that there must be "fundamen-
tally different correlative types of consciousness for them."
Husserl's terms horizon and ground are metaphorical, at once visual
and geological. A horizon is not a thing "out there" but rather a struc-
ture of appearance. It therefore implicates or points back to the per-
ceiver for whom appearances are so structured. In phenomenological
language, "horizon" taken noematically as a structure of appearance
necessarily implicates "horizon" taken noetically as a structure of con-
sciousness. One could say that a horizon is the precondition for the ap-
pearance of anything, except that "precondition" is too static. Stated
in a genetic register, a horizon is a dynamic structure of disclosure in
which both the object (noema) and consciousness (noesis) partake
(Steinbock 1995, p. 107). Anything that comes forth, manifests, or
emerges does so in an open clearing or expanse, delimited by a

36
The Enactive Approach
horizon. The horizon of every possible horizon is the world. Yet the
world-horizon cannot be the synthesis, totality, or mereological sum of
all these possible horizons because it is pregiven or a priori with respect
to any of them and thus is sui generis. Similarly, to describe the life-
world as ground (Boden) is not to say that it is a static foundation;
rather, it is the pregiven soil out of which everything is generated and
nourished. This soil includes one's forebears and culture. We human
beings constitute and reconstitute ourselves through cultural tradi-
tions, which we experience as our own development in a historical
time that spans the generations. To investigate the life-world as
horizon and ground of all experience therefore requires investigating
none other than generativity—the processes of becoming, of making
and remaking, that occur over the generations and within which any
individual genesis is always already situated.
Generative phenomenology brings to the fore the intersubjective,
social, and cultural aspects of our radical embodiment. Individuals are
born and die, they develop and constantly change, and they emerge
from their forebears and perpetuate themselves in generations to
come. Individual subjectivity is from the outset intersubjectivity, origi-
nally engaged with and altered by others in speciﬁc geological and cul-
tural environments (Depraz 1999c, p. 482; Steinbock 1995). Individual
subjectivity is intersubjectively and culturally embodied, embedded,
and emergent.
Classical cognitive science, to the extent that it operated under the
assumption that the individual self comes ﬁrst and the other second,
simply left out intersubjectivity and culture. Indeed, it had no real
means to analyze their contributions to the "cognitive architecture" of
the human mind. As a result, classical cognitive science has offered ab-
stract and reiﬁed models of the mind as a disembodied and cultureless
physical symbol system or connectionist neural network in the head of
a solitary individual. As we will see in the last chapter of this book,
however, the enactive approach, particularly when guided by genetic
and generative phenomenologies of the lived body, intersubjectivity,
and the life-world, offers a different vision. I will argue that self and
other enact each other reciprocally through empathy and that human
subjectivity emerges from developmental processes of enculturation
and is conﬁgured by the distributed cognitive web of symbolic culture.

ACCORDING TO THE ENACTIVE APPROACH, the human mind emerges
from self-organizing processes that tightly interconnect the brain, body,
and environment at multiple levels. The key ideas on which this propo-
sition is based are those of autonomous systems and emergence or emergent
processes. In this chapter, I explain these ideas. In the next chapter, I ex-
plore some connections between these ideas and phenomenological
ideas about form, in particular forms or structures of behavior. These
two chapters will lay the groundwork for the enactive strategy of ad-
dressing the explanatory gap by going back to the roots of mind in life
and then working forward to subjectivity and consciousness.
In the ﬁrst section of this chapter, I review some basic ideas about dy-
namic systems that form a background for the enactive approach. In
the second section, I explain the notion of an autonomous system. A
distinctive feature of the enactive approach is the emphasis it gives to
autonomy. In brief, an autonomous system is a self-determining
system, as distinguished from a system determined from the outside,
or a heteronomous system. On the one hand, a living cell, a multicel-
lular animal, an ant colony, or a human being behaves as a coherent,
self-determining unity in its interactions with its environment. An au-
tomatic bank machine, on the other hand, is determined and con-
trolled from the outside, in the realm of human design. The paradigm
for interaction with a heteronomous system is input/processing/
output, in which deviations from desired outputs are seen as system er-
rors. The paradigm for interaction with an autonomous system is a
37
T H R E E
N  N  N
Autonomy and Emergence

38
The Enactive Approach
conversation, in which unsatisfactory outcomes are seen as breaches of
understanding (Varela 1979, p. xii). According to the enactive ap-
proach, living beings and cognitive agents need to be understood as
autonomous systems. I discuss the implications of this autonomy per-
spective for how we think about information in the third section.
In the fourth section, I turn to emergence, a now familiar notion that
describes the arising of large-scale, collective patterns of behavior in com-
plex systems as diverse as cells, brains, ecosystems, cities, and economies.
Emergence is closely related to self-organization and circular causality,
both of which involve the reciprocal inﬂuence of "bottom-up" and "top-
down" processes. For example, a tornado emerges through the self-
organization of circulating air and water particles; it reciprocally sucks
those particles into a particular macroscopic conﬁguration, with devas-
tating effect for anything in its path. In this section, I sketch a way of
thinking about emergence that I call dynamic co-emergence. Dynamic
co-emergence means that a whole not only arises from its parts, but the
parts also arise from the whole. Part and whole co-emerge and mutually
specify each other. A whole cannot be reduced to its parts, for the parts
cannot be characterized independently of the whole; conversely, the
parts cannot be reduced to the whole, for the whole cannot be charac-
terized independently of the parts. I discuss philosophical issues related
to this conception of emergence in Appendix B.
Dynamic Systems
In recent years growing interest in the dynamics of cognition and emo-
tion has given rise to a distinct dynamical approach in mind science
(Kelso 1995; Lewis and Granic 2000; Port and van Gelder 1995; Thelen
and Smith 1994). The central idea of the dynamical approach is that
natural cognition—cognition in evolved, living agents—is a dynamic
phenomenon and accordingly needs to be understood from the per-
spective of the science of dynamic systems. This perspective includes
dynamic-systems theory (a branch of pure mathematics), dynamic-
systems modeling (mathematical modeling of empirical systems), and
experimental investigations of biological and psychological phenomena
informed by these tools.
The ﬁrst important concept we need to introduce in this context is
that of a dynamic system.1 In simple terms a dynamic system is one that

Autonomy and Emergence
39
changes over time. The term system, however, is ambiguous, in that it
can refer either to an actual system in the world, such as the solar
system, or to a mathematical model of an actual system. In the case of
the actual world, the term system does not admit of precise deﬁnition.
In general, a system is a collection of related entities or processes that
stands out from a background as a single whole, as some observer sees
and conceptualizes things. The classic example from the history of sci-
ence is the solar system. Its components are the sun, moon, and
planets, and its states are their possible conﬁgurations. What changes
over time is the state of the system. A dynamic system in the sense of a
model, however, is a mathematical construction that aims to describe
and predict the way an actual system changes over time (the paths of
the planets, and events such as eclipses, in the case of the solar
system). To this end, some aspects of the actual system are singled out
as being especially important and are mathematically represented by
quantitative variables. Specifying the numerical values of all the vari-
ables at a given time indicates the state of the system at that time. A dy-
namic system includes a procedure for producing such a description
of the state of the system and a rule for transforming the current state-
description into another state-description for some future time. A dy-
namic system is thus a mathematical model for the way that a system
changes or behaves as time passes.
If the passage of time is considered to be continuous (like the
sweeping second hand of an analogue clock), then the dynamic system
is a differentiable one: the variables change in a smooth and contin-
uous way, and the rules or "evolution equations" that govern the
changing state of the system take the form of differential equations. If
time is considered to pass in evenly spaced, discrete jumps (like a dig-
ital clock), then the system is described by a difference equation or a
mapping (a function repeatedly applied or iterated in discrete time
steps). Some differential equations have an analytical solution, which
means they can be exactly solved by mathematical formulas. Given the
starting values of the variables (the initial conditions), then all future
states of the system can be known without recalculating the state of the
system for each time increment. Most differential equations, however,
cannot be solved in this way. When the equations contain nonlinear
terms—functions in which the value of the output is not directly pro-
portional to the sum of the inputs—then such a solution is impossible.

40
The Enactive Approach
Therefore a different mathematical approach has to be taken from
that of ﬁnding a formula that makes possible the prediction of a future
state from a present one.
This other approach, introduced by Henri Poincaré in the nine-
teenth century, is known as the qualitative study of differential equa-
tions (or of nonlinear differentiable dynamic systems). One thinks of
the space of all possible states of the system as a geometric space,
known as state space or phase space, and the way that the system
changes or behaves over time as curves or trajectories in this space. In-
stead of seeking a formula for each solution as a function of time, one
studies the collection of all solutions (corresponding to trajectories in
phase space) for all times and initial conditions at once (Norton 1995,
p. 46). This approach is said to be qualitative because it uses topolog-
ical and geometrical techniques to study the general or global char-
acter of the system's long-term behavior (its behavior in phase space),
instead of seeking to predict the system's exact future state (the spe-
ciﬁc values of its variables at a future time). It is precisely this qualita-
tive approach to dynamics that goes by the name of dynamic systems
theory.
We need to introduce one more related notion—that of complexity.
The term complexity describes behavior that is neither random nor or-
dered and predictable; rather, it is in between, exhibiting changing
and unstable patterns. Of particular importance in the context of re-
cent nonlinear dynamic-systems approaches to the brain and behavior
is the notion of complexity as dynamic instability or metastability—"the suc-
cessive expression of different transient dynamics with stereotyped
temporal patterns being continuously created and destroyed and re-
emerging again" (Friston 2000b, p. 238). Recent science indicates that
complexity of this sort can be found at numerous scales and levels,
from the molecular and organismic to the ecological and evolutionary,
as well as the neural and behavioral.2 In every case the message seems
to be that complexity, instability, or metastability is necessary for self-
organization and adaptive behavior.
We can now return to the dynamical approach in mind science. The
fundamental dynamical hypothesis of this approach is that natural
cognitive agents (people and other animals) are dynamic systems (or,
more precisely, that the cognitive systems agents instantiate are dy-
namic systems), and that accordingly action, perception, and cogni-

Autonomy and Emergence
41
tion should be explained in dynamic terms (van Gelder 1998). Propo-
nents of the dynamical hypothesis contrast it with the cognitivist hy-
pothesis, which states that cognitive agents (or the cognitive systems
they instantiate), whether natural or artiﬁcial, are digital computers or
physical symbol systems and that accordingly cognition should be ex-
plained in symbol-processing terms.
To illustrate these ideas, we can turn to research on neural and be-
havioral coordination dynamics by Haken, Kelso, and colleagues
(Bressler and Kelso 2001; Kelso 1995). One case they have studied is
rhythmic ﬁnger movement (Haken, Kelso, and Bunz 1985). The ex-
perimental task was to move the two index ﬁngers at the same fre-
quency from side to side. At low speeds, there are two comfortable co-
ordination patterns (the system is bistable): either the ﬁngers move
in-phase (equivalent muscle groups in each hand contract simultane-
ously) or anti-phase (equivalent muscle groups alternate in their con-
traction and expansion). As the speed gradually increases, the in-
phase pattern becomes unstable, and eventually at a certain critical
frequency the ﬁngers spontaneously switch to an anti-phase pattern
(the system undergoes a bifurcation). As the speed decreases, the in-
phase pattern becomes stable again, but it does so below the original
switching point (this delayed return to a previous state is known as hys-
teresis).
Haken, Kelso, and colleagues devised a dynamic-systems model to
describe and predict these properties of motor behavior. The model
describes how the relative phase relation between the two ﬁngers
evolves over time. Relative phase is an example of a "collective vari-
able"—one whose value is set by the relation between the values of
other variables, in this case those describing the individual ﬁnger
movements. A collective variable describes a high-level or global char-
acteristic of a system that emerges as a coherent and ordered pattern
from the interactions of the system's components. This macrolevel pat-
tern is also known as an order parameter because it reduces the de-
grees of freedom of the system's components by organizing them into
a coherent and ordered pattern. When the ﬁngers move in-phase, the
collective variable or order parameter of relative phase is zero; once
the critical transition or bifurcation to anti-phase happens, the relative
phase becomes nonzero up to some maximum value. Because the
phase transition occurs at a certain critical frequency of ﬁnger oscilla-

42
The Enactive Approach
tion, the frequency acts as a "control parameter" for the system. The
control parameter does not dictate or prescribe the collective variable
or order parameter (the emergent pattern of relative phase). Rather,
its changing values lead the system through a variety of possible pat-
terns or states (Kelso 1995, p. 7). Thus the model mathematically de-
scribes how the control parameter of ﬁnger-movement frequency
leads the system through different patterns of ﬁnger coordination.
In the language of dynamic-systems theory, this kind of description
gives the state space of the system—the abstract and multidimensional
space that represents all possible states of the system by specifying all
possible values of the system's variables. The temporal evolution of the
system corresponds to its trajectory through this space. The model pre-
dicts the observed switching from one phase to another without
positing any internal motor program that directs the switches by is-
suing symbolic instructions. Instead, the phase transitions occur spon-
taneously as emergent properties of the system's self-organizing dy-
namics. Kelso and colleagues have extended and developed this type
of phase-transition model to apply to a wide variety of cognitive do-
mains, such as motor skill learning, speech perception, visual percep-
tion, and the dynamic coordination of activity among cortical areas of
the brain (Bressler and Kelso 2001; Kelso 1995).
One of the key points relating to the dynamical approach is its em-
phasis on time. Traditional computational models are static in that
they specify only a sequence of discrete states through which the
system must pass. In contrast, dynamic-systems models specify how pro-
cesses unfold in real time. As Tim van Gelder states, "Although all cog-
nitive scientists understand cognition as something that happens over
time, dynamicists see cognition as being in time, that is, as an essen-
tially temporal phenomenon (van Gelder 1999a, p. 244). Van Gelder
(1998) describes this contrast as one between change versus state; geom-
etry versus structure; structure in time versus static structure; time versus
order; parallel versus serial; and ongoing versus input/output.
Whereas computationalists focus primarily on discrete states and
treat change as what happens when a system shifts from one discrete
state to another, dynamicists focus on how a system changes state con-
tinuously in time. Dynamicists conceive of state changes geometrically,
in terms of their position and trajectory in phase space, whereas com-
putationalists focus on the internal formal or syntactic structure of

Autonomy and Emergence
43
combinatorial entities. Computationalists think of these structures as
laid out statically (like snapshots), as either present all at once or not,
and hence of cognition as the rule-governed transformation of one
such static structure into another. For dynamicists, cognitive structures
are laid out as temporally extended patterns of activity, and cognition
is seen as the ﬂow of complex temporal structures mutually and simul-
taneously inﬂuencing each other. Dynamicists are therefore interested
in the timing (rates, periods, durations, synchronies) of processes,
whereas computationalists have traditionally been interested only in
the order of cognitive states. Moreover, computationalists tend to
think of this order as being the serial or sequential progression of
sense →perceive →think →act, whereas for dynamicists cognition
unfolds as the continuous coevolution of acting, perceiving, imag-
ining, feeling, and thinking. Finally, whereas computationalists think
of cognitive processes as having an input-output structure—the system
receives an input, proceeds through a sequence of internal operations,
produces an output, and then halts—dynamicists think of processes as
always ongoing, with no clear starting or end points. The goal is not to
map an input at one time onto an output at a later time, but always to
maintain appropriate change (van Gelder 1998).
Autonomous Systems
The dynamicist idea that cognitive processes are always ongoing with
no clear starting or end points can be deepened by introducing the
distinction between autonomous and heteronomous systems. Au-
tonomy and heteronomy literally mean, respectively, self-governed and
other-governed. A heteronomous system is one whose organization is
deﬁned by input-output information ﬂow and external mechanisms of
control. Traditional computational systems, cognitivist or connec-
tionist, are heteronomous. For instance, a typical connectionist net-
work has an input layer and an output layer; the inputs are initially as-
signed by the observer outside the system; and output performance is
evaluated in relation to an externally imposed task. An autonomous
system, however, is deﬁned by its endogenous, self-organizing and self-
controlling dynamics, does not have inputs and outputs in the usual
sense, and determines the cognitive domain in which it operates
(Varela 1979; Varela and Bourgine 1991).

44
The Enactive Approach
In general, to specify any system one needs to describe its organiza-
tion—the set of relations that deﬁnes it as the system it is. In complex
systems theory, the term autonomous refers to a generic type of orga-
nization. The relations that deﬁne the autonomous organization hold
between processes (such as metabolic reactions in a cell or neuronal
ﬁrings in a cell assembly) rather than static entities. In an autonomous
system, the constituent processes (i) recursively depend on each other
for their generation and their realization as a network, (ii) constitute
the system as a unity in whatever domain they exist, and (iii) deter-
mine a domain of possible interactions with the environment (Varela
1979, p. 55). The paradigm is a living cell. The constituent processes in
this case are chemical; their recursive interdependence takes the form
of a self-producing, metabolic network that also produces its own
membrane; and this network constitutes the system as a unity in the
biochemical domain and determines a domain of possible interactions
with the environment. This kind of autonomy in the biochemical do-
main is known as autopoiesis (Maturana and Varela 1980). Figure 3.1 il-
lustrates the basic organization required for autopoietic autonomy.
Autopoiesis is the paradigm case of biological autonomy for two rea-
sons. It is empirically the best understood case, and it provides the
core "biologic" of all life on Earth. To qualify as autonomous, however,
a system does not have to be autopoietic in the strict sense (a self-
producing bounded molecular system). An autopoietic system dynam-
ically produces its own material boundary or membrane, but a system
can be autonomous without having this sort of material boundary. The
members of an insect colony, for example, form an autonomous social
network, but the boundary is social and territorial, not material.
In exploring the notion of autonomy, we can take two complemen-
tary approaches—a top-down approach and a bottom-up one (Ruiz-
Mirazo and Moreno 2004). Both approaches see autonomy as a rela-
tional, system-level property, but there is a critical difference between
the two. Whereas the top-down approach focuses on the relational or-
ganization proper to autonomy, the bottom-up approach emphasizes
the energetic and thermodynamic requirements for autonomy.
Varela takes the top-down approach in his 1979 book, Principles of Bio-
logical Autonomy.3 In this work he deﬁnes an autonomous system as a
system that has organizational closure (later called operational closure)
(Varela 1979, pp. 55-60). Here closure does not mean that the system is

Autonomy and Emergence
45
Figure 3.1. The basic autopoietic organization.
materially and energetically closed to the outside world (which of course
is impossible). On the contrary, autonomous systems must be thermody-
namically far-from-equilibrium systems, which incessantly exchange
matter and energy with their surroundings. Organizational closure refers
to the self-referential (circular and recursive) network of relations that
deﬁnes the system as a unity, and operational closure to the reentrant and
recurrent dynamics of such a system.4 An autonomous system is always
structurally coupled to its environment. Two or more systems are
coupled when the conduct of each is a function of the conduct of the
other. (In dynamic-systems language, the state variables of one system
are parameters of the other system, and vice versa.) "Structural cou-
pling" refers to the history of recurrent interactions between two or
more systems that leads to a structural congruence between them (Mat-
urana 1975; Maturana and Varela 1987, p. 75). Thus the state changes of
an autonomous system result from its operational closure and structural
coupling. The result of any state change is always further self-organized
activity within the system, unless its closure is disrupted and it is no

46
The Enactive Approach
longer able to carry on its coupling, in which case it disintegrates. Sys-
tems described as autonomous in this sense abound throughout the
living world—single cells, microbial communities, nervous systems, im-
mune systems, multicellular organisms, ecosystems, and so on. Such sys-
tems need to be seen as sources of their own activity, specifying their
own domains of interaction, not as transducers or functions for con-
verting input instructions into output products. In other words, the au-
tonomous character of these systems needs to be recognized.
The second, bottom-up approach to autonomy builds on these no-
tions of organizational and operational closure, but tries to work out
the energetic and thermodynamic requirements for the instantiation
of "basic autonomy" in the physical world. From this perspective, basic
autonomy is "the capacity of a system to manage the ﬂow of matter and
energy through it so that it can, at the same time, regulate, modify, and
control: (i) internal self-constructive processes and (ii) processes of ex-
change with the environment" (Ruiz-Mirazo and Moreno 2004, p.
240). This capacity brings with it speciﬁc and demanding physical-
implementation requirements: the system must have certain types of
components, speciﬁcally a semipermeable active boundary (a mem-
brane), an energy transduction/conversion apparatus (an energy cur-
rency such as adenosine triphosphate (ATP) in living cells, which
transfers energy from chemical bonds to energy-absorbing reactions
within the cell), and at least one type of component that controls and
facilitates the self-construction processes (catalysts) (Ruiz-Mirazo and
Moreno 2004, p. 252).
Figure 3.1 depicts the basic autopoietic organization for a living cell.
A cell stands out of a molecular soup by creating the boundaries that
set it apart from what it is not and that actively regulate its interactions
with the environment. Metabolic processes within the cell construct
these boundaries, but the metabolic processes themselves are made
possible by those very boundaries. In this way, the cell emerges as a
ﬁgure out of a chemical background. Should this process of self-
production be interrupted, the cellular components no longer form a
unity, gradually diffusing back into a molecular soup.
Figure 3.1 can be compared with Figure 3.2, which depicts the min-
imal form of organizational closure for a nervous system. Any nervous
system operates according to a basic "neurologic," a pattern that con-
tinues and elaborates the biologic of autopoiesis. The fundamental

Autonomy and Emergence
47
Figure 3.2. Organizational closure of the nervous system.
logic of the nervous system is to couple movement and a stream of sen-
sory activity in a continuous circular fashion (Maturana and Varela
1987, pp. 142-176). Wherever movement is essential to a multicellular
organism's mode of life, there is the corresponding development of a
nervous system. A nervous system links sensory surfaces (sense organs
and nerve endings) and effectors (muscles, glands) within the body. In
this way it integrates the organism, holding it together as a mobile
unity, as an autonomous sensorimotor agent.
This neurologic underlies all the variations on sensorimotor coordi-
nation found in the animal kingdom. In all animals, neuronal net-
works establish and maintain a sensorimotor cycle through which what
the animal senses depends directly on how it moves, and how it moves
depends directly on what it senses. No animal is a mere passive re-
spondent; every animal meets the environment on its own sensori-
motor terms. Merleau-Ponty recognized this crucial point in his ﬁrst
work, The Structure of Behavior:
The organism cannot properly be compared to a keyboard on which
the external stimuli would play and in which their proper form would
be delineated for the simple reason that the organism contributes to
the constitution of that form. When my hand follows each effort of a

48
The Enactive Approach
struggling animal while holding an instrument for capturing it, it is
clear that each of my movements responds to an external stimulation;
but it is also clear that these stimulations could not be received without
the movements by which I expose my receptors to their inﬂuence . . .
When the eye and the ear follow an animal in ﬂight, it is impossible to
say "which started ﬁrst" in the exchange of stimuli and responses. Since
all movements of the organism are always conditioned by external in-
ﬂuences, one can, if one wishes, readily treat behavior as an effect of
the milieu. But in the same way, since all the stimulations which the or-
ganism receives have in turn been possible only by its preceding move-
ments which have culminated in exposing the receptor organ to the ex-
ternal inﬂuences, one could also say that the behavior is the ﬁrst cause
of the stimulations.
Thus the form of the excitant is created by the organism itself, by its
proper manner of offering itself to actions from outside. Doubtless, in
order to be able to subsist, it must encounter a certain number of phys-
ical and chemical agents in its surroundings. But it is the organism it-
self—according to the proper nature of its receptors, the thresholds of
its nerve centers and the movements of the organs—which chooses the
stimuli in the physical world to which it will be sensitive. "The environ-
ment (Umwelt) emerges from the world through the actualization or the
being of the organism—[granted that] an organism can exist only if it
succeeds in ﬁnding in the world an adequate environment." This would
be a key board which moves itself in such a way as to offer—and ac-
cording to variable rhythms—such or such of its keys to the in itself mo-
notonous action of an external hammer. (1963, p. 13)5
This passage clearly expresses an autonomy perspective. Organisms
display patterns of behavior that require us to see them as au-
tonomous. Varela tries to characterize this autonomy at an abstract
level in terms of a generic dynamic pattern or form, namely, organiza-
tional and operational closure. Hence Varela gives us his "Closure
Thesis," which states, "Every autonomous system is organizationally
closed" (Varela 1979, p. 58).6
Figure 3.1 illustrates the minimal form this closure takes for life at
the single-cell level, and Figure 3.2 illustrates the minimal form it takes
for the nervous system. Whereas autopoietic closure brings forth a
minimal "bodily self" at the level of cellular metabolism, sensorimotor

Autonomy and Emergence
49
closure produces a "sensorimotor self" at the level of perception and
action. In the one case the passage from network closure to selfhood
(and correlative otherness) happens at the level of an active semiper-
meable boundary or membrane, which regulates interaction with the
outside environment. In the other case it happens at the level of be-
havior and intentional action. In both cases we see the co-emergence
of inside and outside, of selfhood and a correlative world or environ-
ment of otherness, through the generic mechanism of network closure
(autonomy) and its physical embodiment (Varela 1997a; see also
Moreno and Barandiaran 2004).7
In addition to these cellular and sensorimotor forms of selfhood,
other forms of selfhood arise from other organizationally and opera-
tionally closed systems. The immune system, for instance—understood
as an autonomous immune network that establishes a coherent so-
matic identity for the organism, rather than as a mere mechanism of
defense—brings forth a dynamic, somatic identity at a distributed cel-
lular and molecular level (Coutinho 2003; Varela and Coutinho 1991).
The animate form of our living body is thus the place of intersection
for numerous emergent patterns of selfhood and coupling. Whether
cellular, somatic, sensorimotor, or neurocognitive, these patterns de-
rive not from any homuncular self or agent inside the system or-
ganizing it or directing it, but from distributed networks with opera-
tional closure. In Varela's image, our organism is a meshwork of
"selﬂess selves," and we are and live this meshwork (Varela 1991; Varela
and Cohen 1989).
Let me forestall an objection that might arise at this point. The
nervous system is clearly embedded in the body of the organism, and
the organism in its environment (Chiel and Beer 1997). This fact
seemingly contradicts the statement that the nervous system is an au-
tonomous system and that the organism is an autonomous agent. The
thought here would be that the operation of the nervous system loops
through the body (via sensory and motor surfaces), and therefore it is
not possible that the nervous system has operational closure (that the
product of every process within the system stays within that system).
Similarly, because the bodily activity of the organism loops through the
environment (motor activity affects the sensory stimulation one re-
ceives back from the environment), the organism cannot have an op-
erationally closed dynamics.

50
The Enactive Approach
A number of points, both methodological and epistemological, need
to be made in reply. The ﬁrst point is that, strictly speaking, system, au-
tonomy, and heteronomy are heuristic notions—they are cognitive aids
or guides in the scientiﬁc investigation and characterization of observ-
able phenomena and patterns of behavior. As heuristic notions, they
(implicitly) refer back to and implicate the interpretive and explana-
tory stance of an observer (or observer community). What counts as the
system in any given case, and hence whether it is autonomous or het-
eronomous, is context-dependent and interest-relative. For any system
it is always possible to adopt a heteronomy or external-control perspec-
tive, and this can be useful for many purposes. Nevertheless, this stance
does not illuminate—and indeed can obscure—certain observable pat-
terns of behavior, namely, patterns arising from the system's internal dy-
namics rather than external parameters. An organism dynamically pro-
duces and maintains its own organization as an invariant through
change, and thereby also brings forth its own domain of interaction.
(Although living organisms are paradigmatic in this regard, nothing
apparently rules out the possibility of artiﬁcial autonomy.) A het-
eronomy perspective does not provide an adequate framework to inves-
tigate and understand this phenomenon; an autonomy perspective is
needed.
The second point is that in any given case or for any candidate
system we need to distinguish between, on the one hand, the opera-
tion of the system as such, which is a function of both its organization
(the set of relations that deﬁnes it as a system) and physical structure,
and, on the other hand, its performance in relation to whatever wider
context in which it is observed. For example, if we wish to characterize
the organization and operation of the nervous system as a ﬁnite neu-
ronal network, then we need to characterize the nervous system as or-
ganizationally and operationally closed, such that any change of ac-
tivity in a neuron (or neural assembly) always leads to a change of
activity in other neurons (either directly through synaptic action or in-
directly through intervening physical and chemical elements). Sen-
sory and effector neurons are no exception because any change in the
one leads to changes in the other, such that the network always closes
back upon itself, regardless of intervening elements (Maturana and
Varela 1980, p. 127). Nevertheless, the domain of states available to the
nervous system (as an operationally closed network) is clearly a func-
tion of its history of interactions with the rest of the body (and the en-

Autonomy and Emergence
51
vironment). Hence, besides characterizing the nervous system's opera-
tion as a closed network, we need to characterize its performance in its
structural coupling with the rest of the body (and the environment).
Similarly, to characterize the organism as a ﬁnite cellular or multicel-
lular entity, we need to characterize it as an organizationally and oper-
ationally closed system. At the same time, we need to characterize the
organism's performance or behavior in its structural coupling with the
environment.
We can also shift perspectives and characterize the nervous system as
a heteronomous system—that is, as a component system with various
functions deﬁned in relation to the organism (such as registering sen-
sory changes or guiding movement). Notice, however—and this is the
third point—that in so shifting perspectives we are ipso facto no longer
talking about the same system. The system with which we are now con-
cerned is no longer the nervous system as a ﬁnite neuronal network,
but rather the larger system of the organism (in which the nervous
system is seen as a component). Similarly, we can also shift perspectives
and characterize the organism as a heteronomous system subject to
the control of the environment (for instance, other organisms). Once
again, in thus shifting perspectives we are ipso facto no longer dealing
with the same system. The system now is the larger system of organism-
plus-environment, not the organism as a ﬁnite cellular or multicellular
entity.8
These considerations show us that there is no inconsistency between
characterizing the nervous system and organism as autonomous and
emphasizing their somatic and environmental embeddedness. We do,
however, have to keep our logical and conceptual accounts clear, so
that we know which explanatory heuristic is in play at any given time.
In any case, for the enactive approach it is the autonomy perspective
on natural cognitive agents that remains the reference point for un-
derstanding mind and life, not a predeﬁned input-output task stru-
cure.
Information and Meaning
Adopting an autonomy perspective also brings with it a certain way of
thinking about semantic information or meaning. For enactive theo-
rists, information is context-dependent and agent-relative; it belongs
to the coupling of a system and its environment. What counts as infor-

52
The Enactive Approach
mation is determined by the history, structure, and needs of the system
acting in its environment.
According to the received view in cognitive science, in order to ex-
plain cognitive abilities we need to appeal to information-bearing
states inside the system. Such states, by virtue of the semantic informa-
tion they carry about the world, qualify as representations. Cognitivists
conceive of these representations as symbols in a computational "lan-
guage of thought," and connectionists as constrained patterns of net-
work activity corresponding to phase space "attractors" (regions of
phase space toward which all nearby trajectories converge). In either
case there is a strong tendency to adopt an objectivist conception of
representation: representations are internal structures that encode
context-independent information about the world, and cognition is
the processing of such information.
This objectivist notion of information presupposes a heteronomy
perspective in which an observer or designer stands outside the system
and states what is to count as information (and hence what is to count
as error or success in representation). Information looks different
from an autonomy perspective. Here the system, on the basis of its op-
erationally closed dynamics and mode of structural coupling with the
environment, helps determine what information is or can be.
A neurobiological example can help to illustrate these ideas.9 Certain
kinds of cortical neurons are often described as feature detectors be-
cause they respond preferentially (ﬁre above their base rate) to various
types of stimuli, such as edges, lines, and moving spots. Such neurons
are identiﬁed by recording their individual activity with a microelec-
trode and determining the sensory stimulus to which the neuron is
most sensitive. Such neurons are said to "represent" features of objects
and to make that information available for futher processing by various
systems in the brain. This view lies behind the standard formulation of
the so-called binding problem. This problem concerns how distinct fea-
tures (shape, color, motion), as represented by cell populations in spa-
tially distributed and functionally segregated neural pathways, can be
bound together to form a complete and accurate representation of the
object (so that the right shapes go with the right colors and motions).
This way of thinking about the brain treats it as a heteronomous system:
object features outside the organism provide informational inputs to
the brain, and the brain's information processing task is to arrive at an

Autonomy and Emergence
53
accurate representation of the objective world and produce an adaptive
motor output.
From an autonomy perspective, it is crucial to distinguish between in-
formation about stimuli as they are deﬁned by an observer and infor-
mation in the sense of what meanings the stimuli have for the animal.
Only the latter play a signiﬁcant role in the brain's operation. The no-
tion of an object "feature" is deﬁned by an observer who stands outside
the system, has independent access to the environment, and establishes
correlations between environmental features and neuronal responses.
The animal's brain has no access to features in this sense (and a fortiori
has no access to any mapping from features to neuronal responses). As
Freeman explains, "In the view from neurodynamics, neurons that re-
spond to edges, lines, and moving spots are manifesting the local topo-
logical properties of neuronal maps, which extract local time and space
derivatives in automatic preprocessing for spatial and temporal con-
trast enhancement. No objects or features are manifested at the level of
the single neuron, assuredly not those used by an observer" (Freeman
1995, p. 54). From an autonomy perspective, individual neurons do not
detect objectively deﬁned features. Rather, assemblies of neurons make
sense of stimulation by constructing meaning, and this meaning arises
as a function of how the brain's endogenous and nonlinear activity
compensates for sensory perturbations. From this perspective, the
feature-binding problem is not the brain's problem, but the brain theo-
rist's problem; it is an artifact of a certain way of looking at the brain.
Freeman's description of the alternative view, based on looking at the
brain as an autonomous system operating according to nonlinear
causality, is well worth quoting here:
In this view the experimenter trains a subject to co-operate through the
use of positive and negative reinforcement, thereby inducing a state of
expectancy and search for a stimulus, as it is conceived by the subject.
When the expected stimulus arrives, the activated receptors transmit
pulses to the sensory cortex, where they elicit the construction by non-
linear dynamics of a macroscopic, spatially coherent oscillatory pattern
that covers an entire area of sensory cortex . . . It is observed by means
of the electroencephalogram (EEG) from electrode arrays on all the
sensory cortices . . . It is not seen in recordings from single neuron ac-
tion potentials, because the fraction of the variance in the single neu-

54
The Enactive Approach
ronal pulse train that is covariant with the neural mass is far too small,
on the order of 0.1 percent.
The emergent pattern is not a representation of a stimulus . . . It is a
state transition that is induced by a stimulus, followed by a construction
of a pattern that is shaped by the synaptic modiﬁcation among cortical
neurons from prior learning. It is also dependent on the brain stem nu-
clei that bathe the forebrain in neuromodulatory chemicals. It is a dy-
namic action pattern that creates and carries the meaning of the stim-
ulus for the subject. It reﬂects the individual history, present context,
and expectancy, corresponding to the unity and wholeness of inten-
tionality. Owing to dependence on history, the patterns created in each
cortex are unique to each subject. (Freeman 1999b, pp. 149-150)
The distinction between autonomous meaning-construction and
heteronomous information processing needs to be placed in the
broader context of the embodied dynamicist way of thinking about in-
formation. To explain this way of thinking, it will be helpful to go back
to ideas introduced by Howard Pattee (1977). Pattee made an impor-
tant distinction between two modes of description of a complex
system—the linguistic mode, which describes the system in terms of dis-
crete, rate-independent, symbolic elements, and the dynamical mode,
which describes the system in terms of continuous, rate-dependent
processes, and thus explicitly includes the ﬂow of time. Pattee raised
the following question: "How do we know we are not intepreting cer-
tain structures as descriptions, only because we recognize them as con-
sistent with rules of one of our own languages?" (1977, p. 262). In
other words, how do we know our linguistic descriptions are not simply
observer-relative, but rather correspond to symbolic structures that be-
long to the system itself and play a role in its operation? And he an-
swered: "we must further restrict our model of a complex system to re-
move the case of the external observer reading a message that is not
really in the system itself. This restriction is achieved by requiring that
a complex system must read and write its own messages" (1977, p.
262).
Pattee's example is a living cell. When we describe DNA triplets as
"coding for" amino acids, we employ the linguistic mode of descrip-
tion. Which amino acid a given DNA triplet speciﬁes is supposed to be
rate-independent—it does not matter how fast the triplet is "read" in

Autonomy and Emergence
55
the course of protein synthesis. It is also supposed to be arbitrary, in
the sense that "[i]t is hard to see why a code in which GGC means
glycine and AAG means lycine is either better or worse than one in
which the meanings are reservsed" (Maynard Smith 1986, p. 19). Ac-
cording to Pattee, the linguistic mode of description in this case is not
observer-relative because the cell is a self-describing system that "reads
and writes its own messages." The writing of its own messages corre-
sponds to DNA replication (the production of a complement of the
original DNA molecule through a template); the reading of its own
messages corresponds to protein synthesis (DNA "transcription" to
RNA and RNA "translation" to protein).
Pattee then makes a number of crucial points. First, for the code to
be read there must ultimately be a transduction or conversion within
the cell from the linguistic mode to the dynamical mode. This conver-
sion occurs when the rate-independent linear array of amino acids
folds to become a three-dimensional enzyme. Within the life cycle of
the cell, there is thus a transformation from the enzyme as something
designated in the genome to the enzyme as an operational component
of metabolism. Second, this transformation (the protein folding) is
not itself linguistically described in the cell, but rather happens ac-
cording to physical law (under the higher-order constraint of the
DNA-speciﬁced amino acid sequence). Third, if the transformation
were linguistically described, the speed and precision with which it is
accomplished would be considerably compromised. Pattee's conclu-
sion is that "we would not expect a complete formal description or sim-
ulation of a complex system to adapt or function as rapidly or reliably
as the partially self-describing, tacit dynamic system it simulates" (1977,
p. 264).
Pattee emphasizes the complementarity of the linguistic and dy-
namical modes of description, but also suggests that symbolic infor-
mation emerges from and acts as a constraint on dynamics. This idea
is important for embodied dynamicism and the enactive approach.
Let us return to the example of the cell. In general, nucleotide
triplets are capable of predictably specifying an amino acid if and only
if they are properly embedded in the cell's metabolism, that is, in a
multitude of enyzmatic regulations in a complex biochemical net-
work. This network has a chicken-and-egg character at several levels.
First, proteins can arise only from a DNA/RNA "reading" process, but

56
The Enactive Approach
this process cannot happen without proteins. Second, the DNA
"writing" and "reading" processes must be properly situated within
the intracellular environment, but this environment is a result of
those very processes. Finally, the entire cell is an autopoietic system—
that is, an autonomous system deﬁned by an operationally closed net-
work of molecular processes that simultaneously both produces and
realizes the cell concretely in the physical space of its biochemical
components.
Now, when we employ the linguistic mode of description and state
that DNA/RNA "codes" for proteins, we restrict our focus to one par-
ticular sequence of this overall circular causality. We abstract away
from the many intervening and necessary causal steps in the actual dy-
namic process of protein synthesis, and we bracket out the essential
participation of many other molecular elements (such as RNA poly-
merase enzymes, and positive and negative regulatory proteins). We
"thus reduce our description to a skeleton that associates a certain part
of a nucleic acid with a certain protein segment. Next we observe that
this kind of simpliﬁed description of an actual dynamic process is a
useful one in following the sequences of reproductive steps from one
generation to the other, to the extent that the dynamic process stays
stable (i.e., the kinds of dynamics responsible for bonding, folding,
and so on) . . . A symbolic explanation, such as the description of some
cellular components as genes, betrays the emergence of certain co-
herent patterns of behavior to which we choose to pay attention" (Varela 1979,
p. 75). It is the emergence of such coherent dynamic patterns that un-
derwrites the symbolic informational level of description: "An object
or event is a symbol only if it is a token for an abbreviated nomic chain
that occurs within the bounds of the system's organizational closure. In other
words, whenever the system's closure determines certain regularities
in the face of internal or external interactions and perturbations, such
regularities can be abbreviated as a symbol, usually the initial or ter-
minal element in the nomic chain" (Varela 1979, pp. 79-80). Thus,
when we talk about DNA "coding" for proteins we are not referring to
a special type of symbolic causal relation or a special type of intrinsi-
cally informational molecule that rises above the dynamic fray. Rather,
we are abbreviating a lengthy but remarkably stable dynamic pattern
of biochemical events. It is precisely the stability and predictability of
the entire pattern that allows us to telescope it in a linguistic mode of

Autonomy and Emergence
57
description by treating nucleotide triplets as in effect "standing for"
amino acids.
This mode of description is unobjectionable (and has heuristic
value) as long as it is remembered that the genetic code is no more
than a rule of causal speciﬁcity based on the fact that cells use nucleic
acids as templates for the primary structure (amino acid sequence) of
proteins (Godfrey-Smith 2000b; Thompson 1997). Yet it is unaccept-
able to say that DNA contains the information for phenotypic design,
because this statement attributes an intrinsic semantic-informational
status to one particular type of component and thereby divests this
component of its necessary embedding in the dynamics of the au-
topoietic network. It is this network in its entirety that speciﬁes the
phenotypic characteristics of a cell, not one of its components, and it is
this network as a whole that serves as the precondition and causal basis
of DNA replication ("writing") and protein synthesis ("reading") (see
Moss 1992). Information is not intrinsic to the static linear array of the
DNA sequence, but is rather dynamically constituted in and by the cell
as an autopoietically organized, three-dimensional entity—by the cell
as a body. In summary, the linguistic mode is emergent from the dy-
namical mode, and information exists only as dynamically embodied.
With these points having been made, we return to the difference be-
tween autonomous meaning-construction and heteronomous infor-
mation processing. Information is formed within a context rather than
imposed from without. Gregory Bateson used to say, "information is a
difference that makes a difference" (Bateson 1972, p. 315). We could
elaborate this insight by saying that information, dynamically con-
ceived, is the making of a difference that makes a difference for some-
body somewhere (see Oyama 2000b). Information here is understood
in the sense of informare, to form within (Varela 1979, p. 266). An au-
tonomous system becomes informed by virtue of the meaning forma-
tion in which it participates, and this meaning formation depends on
the way its endogenous dynamics speciﬁes things that make a differ-
ence to it (Kelso and Kay 1987; Turvey and Shaw 1999).
For another example we can return to the ﬁnger coordination study
of Haken, Kelso, and Bunz (1985). There the switching from in-phase
to anti-phase happens without any command from a motor program;
rather, it occurs spontaneously as an emergent property of the system's
self-organizing dynamics. The collective variable or order parameter

58
The Enactive Approach
of relative phase is informational in the sense that it speciﬁes coherent
patterns or relations that inform the system and that can be physically
or physiologically realized in multiple ways. As Kelso explains:
Instead of treating dynamics as ordinary physics using standard biophys-
ical quantities such as mass, length, momentum, and energy, our coordi-
nation or pattern dynamics is informational from the very start. The order
parameter, f [relative phase], captures the coherent relations among
different kinds of things. Unlike ordinary physics, the pattern dynamics
is context dependent: the dynamics are valid for a given biological func-
tion or task, but largely independent of how this function is physiologi-
cally implemented. Thus, if we accept that the same order parameter, f,
captures coherent spatiotemporal relations among different kinds of
things, and the same equations of motion describe how different coor-
dination patterns form, coexist, and change, it seems justiﬁed to con-
clude that order parameters in biological systems are functionally spe-
ciﬁc, context-sensitive informational variables; and that the coordination
dynamics are more general than the particular structures that instan-
tiate them.
Notice, coordination dynamics is not trapped (like ordinary physics)
by its (purely formal) syntax. Order parameters are semantic, relational
quantities that are intrinsically meaningful to system functioning. What
could be more meaningful to an organism than information that speci-
ﬁes the coordinative relations among its parts or between itself and the
environment? This view turns the mind-matter, information-dynamics
interaction on its head. Instead of treating dynamics as ordinary physics
and information as a symbolic code acting in the way that a program re-
lates to a computer, dynamics is cast in terms that are semantically
meaningful. (Kelso 1995, p. 145)
Let me connect these points to the autonomy perspective. As we
have seen, from the autonomy perspective a natural cognitive agent—
an organism, animal, or person—does not process information in a
context-independent sense. Rather, it brings forth or enacts meaning
in structural coupling with its environment. The meanings of an au-
tonomous system's states are formed within (informare) the context of
the system's dynamics and structural coupling. Therefore, if we wish to
continue using the term representation, then we need to be aware of

Autonomy and Emergence
59
what sense this term can have for the enactive approach. Representa-
tional "vehicles" (the structures or processes that embody meaning)
are temporally extended patterns of activity that can crisscross the
brain-body-world boundaries, and the meanings or contents they em-
body are brought forth or enacted in the context of the system's struc-
tural coupling with its environment.
Another way to make this point would be to say that autonomous sys-
tems do not operate on the basis of internal representations in the sub-
jectivist/objectivist sense. Instead of internally representing an ex-
ternal world in some Cartesian sense, they enact an environment
inseparable from their own structure and actions (Varela, Thompson,
and Rosch 1991, p. 140). In phenomenological language, they consti-
tute (disclose) a world that bears the stamp of their own structure. As
Merleau-Ponty puts it, quoting Goldstein, in the passage cited earlier:
"the environment emerges from the world through the being or actu-
alization of the organism." In the case of animal life, the environment
emerges as a sensorimotor world through the actualization of the or-
ganism as a sensorimotor being. The organism is a sensorimotor being
thanks to its nervous system. The nervous system connects anatomi-
cally distant sensory and motor processes, subsuming them in opera-
tionally closed sensorimotor networks. Through their coherent, large-
scale patterns of activity these networks establish a sensorimotor
identity for the animal—a sensorimotor self. In the same stroke, they
specify what counts as "other," namely, the animal's sensorimotor
world.
This idea of a sensorimotor world—a body-oriented world of per-
ception and action—is none other than von Uexküll's original notion
of an Umwelt. An Umwelt is an animal's environment in the sense of its
lived, phenomenal world, the world as it presents itself to that animal
thanks to its sensorimotor repertoire: "all that a subject perceives be-
comes his perceptual world and all that he does, his effector-world.
Perceptual and effector worlds together form a closed unit, the
Umwelt" (von Uexküll 1957, p. 6). The logic of this co-emergence is
depicted in Figure 3.3.
In this ﬁgure, information is the intentional relation of the system to
its milieu, established on the basis of the system's autonomy (organiza-
tional-operational closure). One of the main scientiﬁc tasks for em-
bodied dynamicism and the enactive approach is to explain how the

60
The Enactive Approach
Figure 3.3. Co-emergence of autonomous selfhood and world.
pattern dynamics of brain, body, and behavior are informational in
this sense (see Kelso 1995, p. 288).
Emergent Processes
Another key idea of the enactive approach that needs elaboration here
is the idea of emergence or emergent processes. In complex systems theory,
an emergent process is one that results from collective self-
organization. An emergent process belongs to an ensemble or network
of elements, arises spontaneously or self-organizes from the locally de-
ﬁned and globally constrained or controlled interactions of those ele-
ments, and does not belong to any single element. The enactive ap-
proach builds on this notion of emergence but reformulates it as
"dynamic co-emergence," in which part and whole co-emerge and mu-
tually specify each other.
Let me ﬁrst introduce emergence in the complex systems sense. A
standard example of this kind of emergence is the formation of "Bé-

Autonomy and Emergence
61
nard cells," a dynamic geometrical pattern of ﬂuid ﬂow, in liquids or
gases subject to an imposed temperature gradient (see Kelso 1995, pp.
7-8; Solé and Goodwin 2000, pp. 13-17). The emergence of Bénard
cells can be seen in the behavior of cooking oil in a frying pan. Ap-
plying heat to the pan increases the temperature difference between
the cooler layer of oil at the top and the hotter layer of oil at the
bottom. When the temperature difference between top and bottom is
small, there is no large-scale or global motion of the oil, but eventually
when the difference becomes large enough instability occurs and the
liquid starts to roll in an orderly fashion known as convection rolls. In
other words, the system undergoes a state transition, described mathe-
matically as a bifurcation, as the new self-organizing behavior and spa-
tial structures of convection rolls emerge. As the temperature gradient
is increased still further, the convection rolls undergo another transi-
tion or bifurcation and give rise to an array of hexagonal up-and-down
ﬂow patterns called Bénard cells.
This example illustrates several basic points about collective self-
organization and dynamic emergence. The temperature gradient is
the control parameter for the transitions or bifurcations. It leads the
system through a variety of possible states but does not dictate, pre-
scribe, or code for the emerging ﬂow patterns. Nor is there any ho-
munculus or program inside the system determining those patterns.
In Kelso's words: "Such spontaneous pattern formation is exactly what
we mean by self-organization: the system organizes itself, but there is
no 'self,' no agent inside the system doing the organizing" (Kelso
1995, p. 8). The order parameter of the system is the amplitude of the
convection rolls. It is created by the interactions of the ﬂuid mole-
cules, but at the same time it governs or constrains their behavior by
drastically reducing the immense number of degrees of freedom of
motion that the individual molecules would otherwise have.
Emergence through collective self-organization thus has two as-
pects. One is local-to-global determination, as a result of which novel
macrolevel structures and processes emerge. The other is global-to-
local determination whereby global structures and processes constrain
local interactions. These global-to-local inﬂuences do not take the
same form as the local-to-global ones: they typically manifest them-
selves through changes in control parameters (the temperature gra-
dient in the example above) and boundary conditions rather than

62
The Enactive Approach
through changes to the individual elements (the ﬂuid molecules). Co-
herent and ordered global behaviors, which are described by collective
variables or order parameters, constrain or govern the behavior of the
individual components, entraining them so that they no longer have
the same behavioral alternatives open to them as they would if they
were not interdependently woven into the coherent and ordered
global pattern. At the same time, the behavior of the components gen-
erates and sustains the global order. This two-sided or double determi-
nation is known as circular causality (Haken 1983).
Emergence and circular causality are crucially important in the con-
text of neurodynamics. Neuroscience indicates that cognition, emo-
tion, and action require the transient integration of numerous, widely
distributed, and constantly interacting brain regions and areas. An
outstanding question for neuroscience today is to determine the
mechanisms of this large-scale integration. From a dynamic-systems
perspective, large-scale integration corresponds to the formation of
transient dynamic links between widespread neural populations
(Varela et al. 2001). On the one hand, large-scale dynamic patterns
emerge from distributed local neuronal activities. On the other hand,
large-scale patterns constrain these local activities. According to a
number of theorists, dynamic instability or metastability is crucial to
large-scale integration because it permits a ﬂexible repertoire of global
states without the system becoming trapped in any one particular
state.10
Emergence and circular causality can also be illustrated by neurody-
namical studies of epilepsy (Thompson and Varela 2001). Focal
epileptic seizures originate in speciﬁc parts of the cortex; they can re-
main conﬁned to those areas or spread to other parts of the brain.
Their clinical manifestations depend on the cortical area in which they
originate, how widely they spread, and how long they last. Local
epileptic activity can modify the subject's mental competencies and
give rise to various kinds of mental experiences, such as visual or audi-
tory illusions and hallucinations, and memory phenomena involving
the vivid actual recall of a past event or déjà-vu illusions. These mental
phenomena can also be induced by direct electrical stimulation of the
temporal lobe in epileptic patients, as classically described by Wilder
Penﬁeld (1938). Thus local neuronal activity at the level of an epilep-
togenic zone can produce large-scale effects, eventually inﬂuencing

Autonomy and Emergence
63
the global level of a moment of consciousness. This is a case of local-to-
global emergence in the brain.
The converse—global-to-local inﬂuence—though less documented
and more controversial, seems also to be the case. The basic idea is
that cognitive activity, which reﬂects large-scale integration in the
brain, can affect local activity. For example, the subject can voluntarily
affect local epileptic activity, as indicated by numerous patient reports
and a few clinically reported cases (see Le Van Quyen and Petitmengin
2002). As long ago as 1954, Penﬁeld and Jasper described the blocking
of a parietal seizure by the initiation of a complex mathematical calcu-
lation (Penﬁeld and Jasper 1954), and recently more extensive obser-
vations have conﬁrmed such cognitive inﬂuences (Schmid-Schonbein
1998). We can assume that such intervention is possible because the
epileptogenic zones are embedded in a complex network of other
brain regions that actively participate in the large-scale integration un-
derlying cognitive acts. It also seems reasonable to assume that these
global patterns of integration can inﬂuence local events, including
eventually the local epileptogenic zones, whose activity can thus be
taken as an indication of the global inﬂuence.
Experimental work by Michel Le Van Quyen, Francisco Varela, and
their colleagues provides evidence for such global-to-local inﬂuence in
the case of a patient with an unusually focal and stable occipitotem-
poral epileptic discharge.11 This patient showed no evidence of cogni-
tive impairment and was willing to participate in simple cognitive tasks
of visual and auditory discrimination. For the visual task, he was asked
to press a button when the target stimulus appeared, but not when the
two other nontarget stimuli were shown. The temporal intervals be-
tween successive discharges of the epileptic spike pattern were ana-
lyzed. Dynamical inspection (in the form of a phase space known as a
ﬁrst-return map) showed that the distribution of the intervals followed
a particular kind of unstable dynamic pattern. The spikes displayed a
distinct periodic activity for a short time before they diverged away
along another unstable direction, a kind of dynamic pattern known as
an unstable periodic orbit. Furthermore, this activity covaried with the
speciﬁc mental state of the patient during the perceptual task and ap-
peared to be modulated by the gamma frequency (30-70 Hertz) ac-
tivity associated with his cognitive states. (Gamma frequency activity is
widely reported to be associated with a variety of cognitive processes,

64
The Enactive Approach
including attention, perception, and memory.) These ﬁndings suggest
that the patient's act of perception contributed in a highly speciﬁc way
to "pulling" the epileptic activities toward particular unstable periodic
orbits. Such global-to-local inﬂuence mobilized by cognitive activity
might open up possibilities for cognitive strategies of control of
epileptic seizures (Le Van Quyen and Petitmengin 2002).
Let me conclude this chapter by linking these ideas about circular
causality and emergence back to autonomy. An autonomy perspective
brings with it a certain way of thinking about emergence. What
emerges in the case of an autonomous system such as a cell is a self-
producing entity that also brings forth its own domain of interactions
(see Figure 3.3). This sort of emergence takes a major step beyond dy-
namic pattern formation in physical dissipative systems:
[A]lthough the phenomenon of self-organization always involves the
generation and maintenance of a global (or high-level) pattern or cor-
relation that constrains the (low-level) dynamics of the components of
the system, in standard dissipative structures this occurs only provided
that the system is put under the appropriate boundary conditions. If
those (externally controlled) conditions are changed (in particular, if
the input of matter or energy is outside a certain range), the self-
organizing dynamic vanishes. Therefore, there is an important differ-
ence between the typical examples of "spontaneous" dissipative struc-
tures and real autonomous systems: in the former case, the ﬂow of
energy and/or matter that keeps the system away from equilibrium is
not controlled by the organization of the system (the key boundary con-
ditions are externally established, either by the scientist in the lab or by
some natural phenomenon that is not causally dependent on the self-
organizing one), whereas in the latter case, the constraints that actually
guide energy/matter ﬂows from the environment through the constitu-
tive processes of the system are endogenously created and maintained.
(Ruiz-Mirazo and Moreno 2004, p. 238)
An autonomous system, such as a cell or multicellular organism, is
not merely self-maintaining, like a candle ﬂame; it is also self-
producing and thus produces its own self-maintaining processes, in-
cluding an active topological boundary that demarcates inside from
outside and actively regulates interaction with the environment. In the
single-cell, autopoietic form of autonomy, a membrane-bounded,

Autonomy and Emergence
65
metabolic network produces the metabolites that constitute both the
network itself and the membrane that permits the network's bounded
dynamics. Other autonomous systems have different sorts of self-
constructing processes and network topologies. Whether the system is
a cell, immune network, nervous system, insect colony, or animal so-
ciety, what emerges is a unity with its own self-producing identity and
domain of interactions or milieu, be it cellular (autopoiesis), somatic
(immune networks), sensorimotor and neurocognitive (the nervous
system), or social (animal societies).
Dynamic co-emergence best describes the sort of emergence we see
in autonomy. In an autonomous system, the whole not only arises
from the (organizational closure of) the parts, but the parts also arise
from the whole.12 The whole is constituted by the relations of the
parts, and the parts are constituted by the relations they bear to one
another in the whole. Hence, the parts do not exist in advance, prior
to the whole, as independent entities that retain their identity in the
whole. Rather, part and whole co-emerge and mutually specify each
other.
Biological life, seen from the perspective of autopoiesis, provides a
paradigm case of dynamic co-emergence. A minimal autopoietic whole
emerges from the dynamic interdependence of a membrane boundary
and an internal chemical reaction network. The membrane and reac-
tion network (as well as the molecules that compose them) do not pre-
exist as independent entities. Rather, they co-emerge through their inte-
grative, metabolic relation to each other. They produce and constitute
the whole, while the whole produces them and subordinates them to it.
We will come back to this paradigm case of dynamic co-emergence in
Part II.

Absolute (explanatory) gap, 253
Absolute ﬂow, 323-326, 337-338
Accommodation, 125
Acquired traits, 192-193
Action, ﬂow of, and experience, 312-
317
Active genesis, 29-30
Activist-pragmatist approach to emo-
tion, 364-366
Activity compared with passivity, 263-264
Adaptation, adaptationism: Di Paolo's
view, 148, 454n9; distinguished from
cognition, 159, 455n13; reconsidered
by developmental systems theory,
202-205; role in evolution, 171; var-
ious views of, 461n24
Affect, affectivity, 263-264, 371-378
Affection, 30
Affective coupling, 393-395
Affective relief, 476n8
Affective salience, 376
Affordances, 247-248
Agency, 260
Aisthesis, 29
Alexander, S., 479n5
Algorithmic processes, 211-213
Alife, minimal autopoiesis in, 107
Allopoiesis, 98
Alterity, 22, 251
Amovable behavior, 449n2
Analogues, 195-196
Analysis, static vs. constitutional, 28
Analytical isomorphism, 272, 305
Analytical reductionism, 72
Ancestor cells, 94, 117
Animals, 94, 221, 449n2
Anthropomorphism, 130
Anticipation, 320
Antinomy of teleological judgment,
131-138
Appearances, 239, 463n8
Appraisal, 371
Appresentation, 383-384
Archean Aeon, 94
Argument from Design, 210, 460n23
Aristotle, Aristotelians: on the body,
227; on cognition and the body,
462n1; on life and mind, 80, 226
Artifacts: cultural, 409-410; distin-
guished from natural purpose, 134-
135; distinguished from organism,
133, 460n23; natural, 210
Artiﬁcial Life, 107
Assimilation, 125
Association, 31-32
Atomism, 479n5
Attention: as a component of reﬂec-
tion, 464n4; and consciousness, 262-
264; and the epoché, 19; in het-
erophenomenology, 306; and preaf-
ference, 369; transparency of, 284-
285; types of, 287
527
Index

Attitude, natural vs. phenomenological,
17-18
Attractors, 52
Autocatalytic network, 104-105
Automaton. See tesselation automaton
Autonomous systems: within au-
tonomous systems, 49-51; character-
ized, 420-421; compared with het-
eronomous systems, 37, 43; deﬁned,
43-44; emotions in, 365; overview of,
43-51
Autonomy, autonomous: bottom-up,
44, 46; deﬁned, 43, 44; distinguished
from autopoiesis, 106-107; under the
enactive approach, 13, 15; perspec-
tives on, 52-54, 58-60
Autopoiesis: in autonomous systems, 60;
and cognition, 122-127; computer
models of, Plates I-V; deﬁned, 44-45,
92, 98, 101; distinguished from au-
tonomy, 106-107; distinguished from
reproduction, 167-168; ecological
context of, 118-122; and interiority,
79; minimal, 107-118; and natural se-
lection, 212-215; in social systems,
451n3; symbiotic with developmental
systems theory, 193; and teleology,
144-149; Turing-compatibility of, 143
Autopoietic machine, 99-100
Autopoietic organization: compared
with autocatalytic network, 104-105;
criteria of, 101, 103, 126; deﬁned,
100-101; overview of, 97-107
Autopoietic systems: constraints in,
425-426; deﬁned, 451n2; dynamic
sensorimotor approach to, 260-261;
and mechanistic models of, 144
Awareness: in heterophenomenology,
306; in the intentional arc model,
370; meta-awareness, 19, 445n2,
464n4; perceptual vs. nonperceptual,
258; reﬂective vs. prereﬂective, 315;
subject-object structure of, 468n14;
transparency of, 284-285. See also
self-awareness
Awareness-content dualism, 468n13
Backward causation, 130
Barandiaran, X., 79
Baressi, J., 397
Basic autonomy, 46
Bateson, G., 57
Beer, R. D., 12
Beﬁndlichkeit, 455n11
Behavior: and the brain, 83-84; com-
pared with comportment, 450n3;
and consciousness, 78-81; of em-
pathy, 396; Merleau-Ponty's view of,
67, 449n2
Behaviorism compared with cogni-
tivism, 4
Being and having, 246-247
Being-in-the-world, 21, 247, 455n11
Belief, suspension of, 470n24
Bénard cells, 60-61, 433
Benehmen, 450n3
Bermúdez, J. L., 464n3
Berthoz, A., 295-296
Binding problem, 52
Binocular rivalry, 346-347, 351-352
Biological naturalism, 237-242
Biological vs. cultural evolution, 193,
458n13
Biology, 358
Bishop, R., 429-430, 433
Bitbol, M.: applied to Kant, 452n4; on
autopoiesis and cognition, 125-126;
on emergence in quantum me-
chanics, 480n6; on transcendental
phenomenology, 82-83
Block, N., 262-264
Boden, 35-36
Boden, M., 159, 455n13
Bodiliness, 258
Bodily activity, three modes of, 243
Bodily feelings, 23
Bodily self-consciousness, 244-252,
464n5
Bodily subjectivity, 245-252
Body: Aristotle vs. Descartes, 227-230;
image compared with schema, 249-
250; as subject, 250
Body-body problem, 235-237, 244-245,
257
Bonding reaction, 108
Bottom-up autonomy, 44, 46
Boundaries: in the autopoietic orga-
nization of metacellulars, 106-107; as
528
Index

a criterion of autopoietic organiza-
tion, 103, 126; deﬁning the system,
98-99; in the Gaia theory, 121; in so-
cial systems, 451n3
Bourgnine, P.: on 3D tesselation au-
tomatons, 110-112; on autopoiesis
and cognition, 125-126; in light of
Rosen, 144
Brain: and behavior, 83-84; decompos-
ability of, 421-423; organization of,
365-366
Brain-in-a-vat example, 240-241
Brentano, F. C., 26-27
British emergentists, 479n5, 480n8
Brough, J. B., 472n1
Bruner, J., 443n4
Bruzina, R., 475n15
Building block model of consciousness,
350-352
Bunz, H., 41-42, 57-58
Buss, L. W., 175-176, 212-213
Campbell, D., 424
Cartesian dualism, 6
Cartwright, N., 440
Catalyst, 101, 104
Catalytic closure, 104-105
Catastrophe theory, 72
Causal asymmetry doctrine, 178-179
Causal closure, 439-440
Causal closure of the physical domain,
principle of, 435
Causal inheritance principle, 435
Causation: backward, 130; downward,
424-428, 431-441; in Rosen's theory,
143
Cells: Bénard, 60-61, 433; as a body,
182-183; ﬁrst, 93-94; minimal, 98,
113; organization of, 97-105; theory,
92-97; Ur-cells, 94, 117
Cellular automaton, 456n16. See also
tesselation automaton
Cellular consciousness, 161-162
Chain-based bond inhibition, 109-110,
451n6
Chalmers, D. J.: on a "hard problem of
life," 223-224; on minimal sufﬁ-
ciency, 474n13; on the neural corre-
lates of consciousness, 349
Change blindness, 276
Chaos theory, 429
Chromatin, 457n5
Chromatin-marking inheritance
system, 177
Church, J., 466n10
Church's Thesis, 448n6
Circular causality: deﬁned, 62; in down-
ward causation, 432; and emergence,
62-64; in emotional self-
organization, 371-372; and form, 66-
72
Clark, A., 128-129
Classical evolution, 170-173
Clay, E. R., 318
Closure, 45, 448n4
Closure Thesis, 48-49
Co-emergence. See emergence
Coen, E., 180, 459n18
Cognition: and autopoiesis, 122-127;
distinguished from adaptation, 159,
455n13; in emotional self-
organization, 371; enactive, 187,
458n11, 460n19; various perspectives
on, 10-13
Cognitive domain, 125
Cognitive empathy studies, 396
Cognitive science: Bruner's view of,
443n4; omissions from, 36; overview
of, 3-4
Cognitive systems, 124
Cognitive unconscious, 6
Cognitivism: cellular vs. animal, 453n8;
compared with connectionism, 9-10;
compared with dynamic systems
theory, 41-43; deﬁned, 126; and in-
formation, 52; overview of, 4-8. See
also computationalism
Cole, J., 390
Collective variable, 41
Common ancestor, 92, 94-95
Comparative (explanatory) gaps, 253-
257
Complexity in dynamic systems, 40
Complex systems theory, 69
Comportment, 416, 450n3. See also be-
havior
Computationalism: compared with dy-
namic systems theory, 42-43; com-
Index
529

Computationalism (continued)
pared with embodied dynamicism,
12-13; compared with genocentrism,
174. See also cognitivism
Computer, computation, 4-5, 7-8
Conatus, 155, 162, 456n15
Connectionism: compared with em-
bodied dynamicism, 10-11; on infor-
mation, 52; mind as neural network,
4; overview of, 8-10
Conscious experience: characterized,
258-259; and time-consciousness,
317-329
Consciousness: absolute, 324-326; 
and appearances, 239, 463n8; and
attention, 262-264; bodily self-
consciousness, 244-252, 464n5; cel-
lular, 161-162; under cognitivism, 5-
7; compared with life, 222-225;
Descartes's view of, 226-230, 462n3;
distinguished from comportment,
416; egoless, 447n11; egological, 22;
higher-order thought theory of,
468n15; imaging, 471n28; and imma-
nent purposiveness, 162; and inter-
subjective openness, 385-386; irre-
ducibility of, 238-240; lack of, in
zombies, 230-235; models of, 350-
354; neural correlates of, 349-356;
neurodynamical model of, 366-370;
primal, 354-355; Searle's view of,
350-354, 463n9; and the structure of
behavior, 78-81; transcendental na-
ture of, 86-87; transitive, 264-265,
468n15; uniﬁed ﬁeld model of, 351-
354, 475n14. See also hard problem of
consciousness; Husserl, E.; time-
consciousness
Consolation behavior, 396
Constancy of matter vs. form, 150-151
Constitution, 15, 21, 28, 59
Constitutional intentionality, 27
Constitutive concepts, 137, 453n7
Constraint in complex systems, 424
Content, 271-272, 285, 358
Content NCC, 349-350
Contingent evolution, 216
Continuity thesis of life and mind,
strong, 128-129
Control loop of the intentional arc,
367-369
Control parameter, 42, 60-61
Convergent evolution, 217
Core consciousness, organization of,
354-355
Cornell, J. F., 136-137
Correlation, 24-25, 28
Cortical deference, 254
Cortical dominance, 253
Cosmelli, D., 463n11
Crick, F., 181
Cultural evolution, 193, 410-411,
458n13
Culture vs. nature, 193, 403-405,
458n14
Cuvier, G. and G., 200-201, 459n18
Dainton, B., 468n13
Damasio, A. R., 235, 456n15
Darwin, C., 130-131, 170
Dasein, 21, 157
Dawkins, R.: on adaptation, 205; on the
Gaia theory, 120; on genes, 179-180
Decay in minimal autopoietic systems,
113-116
Decomposability and emergence, 420-
421
Deep continuity of life and mind, 128-
129, 157-162, 223-224
Deference distinguished from domi-
nance, 253-255
Dennett, D. C.: on adaptationism,
461n24; on the genetic "code," 183-
187; on Goodwin's structuralism,
461n24; on heterophenomenology,
303-310; on informational dualism,
186-187; on intentionality, 159-160;
on introspective reporting, 472n31;
on perceptual completion, 275-276;
on perceptual experience, 279
Dependency Thesis, 292-293
Depew, D. J., 131, 208-209, 214-215
Depictive representation, 466n1
Depraz, N., 375-376, 378, 476n7
Depth perception, 353-354
Descartes, R.: on consciousness and
life, 226-230; "I think," 249; on mind
and life, 80; on recognizing con-
530
Index

sciousness, 462n3; on self and body,
245; on the zombie argument, 462n2
Descriptionalism compared with picto-
rialism, 270-275
Design Space, 461n24
Determinism, 430-431
Developmental systems theory: applied
to enculturation, 403-411; in enac-
tive cognitive science, 458n11; in en-
active evolution, 206; overview of,
187-194; reconsiders adaptationism,
202-205
De Waal, F. B. M., 396, 401
Diachronic downward causation, 433-
434
Dialectical relations, 68-69, 150
Dialectical vs. mechnical thinking, 68
Differential equations, 39-40
Differential reproductive success, 170
Di Paolo, E. A., 147-148, 454n9
Disintegration reaction, 108
Disposition, 455n11
Diversity in developmental systems, 
201
DNA example of complex systems, 54-
57
DNA methylation, 457n5
DNA replication, 168, 457n3
Dominance distinguished from defer-
ence, 253-255
Donald, M., 403, 405, 408-409
Doolittle, W. F., 120
Downward causation, 424-428, 431-
441
Dreyfus, H.: on Husserl, 414-415; on
Husserlian phenomenology, 444n10;
on skillful coping, 313-316
Dualism compared with hylozoism,
139-140
Dupuy, J.-P., 26-27
Dynamic co-emergence: in autonomy,
65; deﬁned, 38, 431; of interiority
and exteriority, 79. See also emer-
gence; form
Dynamic instability, 40
Dynamic sensorimotor approach, 253-
266, 298-299
Dynamic sensorimotor hypothesis, 254
Dynamic singularity, 243
Dynamic stabilization, 208
Dynamic systems: deﬁned, 38-39;
overview of, 38-43; and phenome-
nology, 27; and time-consciousness,
312
Dynamic systems theory: described, 40;
isomorphism in, 83-86; reﬂected in
Husserl, 476n8
Dyson, F., 116
Ecological characterization of life, 95-
97, 118-122
Ecopoiesis, 118-122
Egological consciousness, 22
Eidetic features, 357
Embodied dynamicism, 4, 10-13, 71
Embodiment: as a component of affect,
376-377; as a criterion for living sys-
tems, 113; in embodied dynamicism,
11-12; facial, of empathy, 390
Emergence: classical British views of,
479n5, 480n8; co-emergence, 59-60;
decomposability of, 420-421; de-
ﬁned, 60, 418; described, 38; in de-
scribing dynamic systems, 57; and
downward causation, 417-441; of
emotions, 371-373; in enculturation,
408; in genetic phenomenology, 29;
global-to-local, 61-63, 424-427; in
the intentional arc model, 369; Kim's
view of, 431-441; local-to-global, 61-
63; nonlinear, 138-139, 419-423; on-
tological, 479n5, 480n6; overview of,
60-64; in quantum mechanics,
480n6; in relational holism, 427-431;
terminology, 418-419; through self-
organization, 336-337. See also dy-
namic co-emergence; emergent pro-
cesses
Emergence base, 439
Emergentists, British, 479n5, 480n8
Emergent processes: deﬁned, 60;
identity and sense-making in, 147;
overview of, 60-65
Emotion, 362-366, 370-381
Empathy: bodily, 165; cognitive, 396;
and enculturation, 402-411; reiter-
ated, 392, 399; sensual, 389-390; ty-
pology of, 386-393
Index
531

Enactive approach: and emergence, 60;
to emotion, 362-366; overview of,
13-15; roles of organism and envi-
ronment, 204-205; Varela's view of,
444n9
Enactive cognition, 187, 458n11,
460n19
Enactive evolution, 201-208, 217-218
Enculturation through empathy, 402-
411
En soi. See in-itself
Epigenesis, 175-177
Epilepsy studies, 62-64, 474n12
Epoché, 19-20
Evo-devo, 195
Evolution: biological vs. cultural, 193,
458n13; characterization of life, 95-
97, 123-124; contingent vs. conver-
gent, 216-217; cultural, 193, 410-
411, 458n13; deﬁned, 404; and devel-
opmental systems theory, 187-194;
Kantian analysis of, 130-131; by nat-
ural drift, 460n19; and the "neces-
sary" claim, 123-124; received view
of, 170-173; unit of, 206
Existentialism, 445n5
Expectancy and preafference, 369
Experience: accessibility of, 466n10; vs.
belief about experience, 307-308;
conscious, 258-259; diaphanous,
467n7, 467n10; distinguished from
knowledge, 456n17; under the enac-
tive approach, 13; and the ﬂow of ac-
tion, 312-317; and the imagery de-
bate, 269-280; under intentionality,
25; Jonas's view of, 456n17; kines-
thetic, 232; of the lived body, 248-
251; of music, 476n7; nature of, 83;
prereﬂective, 250-251, 261; sense-
experience, 227-228; sensorimotor,
295-296; subjective character of, 261,
283, 467n8; subject-object structure
of, 446n7; and time-consciousness,
317-329; and transparency, 282-287;
and visualization, 295-296
Explanatory gap: as the body-body
problem, 236-237, 244; under cogni-
tivism, 6-7; under connectionism, 10;
under embodied dynamicism, 12;
under the enactive approach, 14; ety-
mology of, 443n3; and Kantian tele-
ology, 137-138; in mental imagery
analysis, 273; physicality and con-
sciousness, 223; and purpose, 452n1;
various views of, 253, 255-256
Exteriority vs. interiority, 78-81, 225
Extrinsic vs. intrinsic purposiveness,
145-146
Eye development, 196
Feedback and nonlinearity, 419
Feeling of existence, 229-230
Feeling-tone, 376-377
Fiction and imagination, 469n22,
470n23
Figure and ground, 84
Finger coordination study, 41-42, 57-
58
First cell, 93-94
First-order autopoietic systems, 105-107
First-person methods: in brain-imaging
studies, 341-348; distinguished from
third-person, 248; and the epoché,
19-20; in experimental neurophe-
nomenology, 338-340, 474n10; in
heterophenomenology, 303-311
Fisher, R. A., 172
Fissiparity, 94
Fitness, 170-171, 206-207
Fleischaker, G. R., 214
Flexibility, 194-201
Flow, absolute, 323-326
Flow of action, 312-317
Fontana, W., 212-213
Football example of consciousness, 80-
81
Forcible presence, 258-259
Form: and circular causality, 66-72;
constancy of, 150-151; deﬁned, 66;
and the "insider" perspective, 81; as
an integrating agent, 78; phenom-
enal and physiological, 84-85. See
also dynamic co-emergence
Format and content, 271-272, 358
Freedom. See needful freedom
Freeman, W. J.: on emotion, 364-366,
373; on meaning, 53-54; neurody-
namical model of, 366-370
532
Index

Freud, S., 5
Freudian model of the psyche, 5-6
Functionalism, compared with cogni-
tivism, 5
Fungi, 94, 221
Fusion distinguished from relational
holism, 479n3
Gaia theory, 95, 119-122
Gallagher, S.: on Dasein, 380; on emer-
gence, 336-337; on proprioception,
464n3; on protention, 361-362
Gallese, V., 395
Gardner, H., 3
Generation in minimal autopoietic sys-
tems, 113-116
Generative passages, 475n16
Generative phenomenology, 17, 33-36
Genes: under autopoietic criteria, 123;
in developmental systems theory,
191, 404; in genocentrism, 179-180;
homeotic, 198-200; Hox, 199-200;
selector, 197-200, 459n17
Gene selectionism. See genocentrism
Genesis, active vs. passive, 29-30
Genetic "code," 178-187, 457n8
Genetic phenomenology: compared
with generative phenomenology, 33-
34; deﬁned, 28; overview of, 17, 28-
33
Genetic-program metaphor, 180, 457n6
Genocentrism: developmental systems
theory response to, 188-194; and
evolution, 170-173; the gene as a
unit of information, 179-187;
overview of, 172-175; problems with,
173-174; and the Weismann Doc-
trine, 174-179
Gerhart, J., 196-198, 201
Germ line, 174-175
Gibson, J. J., 247-248
Gilbert, S. F., 194
Given, 30, 444n1. See also pregiven
Global-to-local emergence, 61-63, 424-
427
Goguen, J., 449n12
Gold, I., 467n10
Goldman, A. I., 310, 472n31
Goodwin, B., 208, 461n24
Gould, S. J., 202-203, 216
Grabbiness, 258
Gray, R. D.: on nature vs. culture, 404-
405; on organism and environment,
204; on standard environment,
457n8
Grice, H. P., 467n7
Grifﬁths, P. E.: on life cycle, 188; on na-
ture vs. culture, 404-405; on or-
ganism and environment, 204; on
replicates, 192; on standard environ-
ment, 457n8
Ground in generative phenomenology,
35-36
Güzeldere, G., 234
Habit in passive genesis, 32-33
Haken, H., 41-42, 57-58
Haldane, J. B. S., 172
Hamiltonian energy function, 429-430
Hard problem of consciousness: com-
pared with the body-body problem,
237; deﬁned, 7; dualistic view of,
222-225; and purpose, 452n1
Harman, G., 283-284
Hebb, D., 447n12
Hebb's Rule, 447n12
Heidegger, M.: on being-in-the-world,
455n11, 455n14; compared with
Merleau-Ponty, 450n3; on empathy,
477n6; Husserl's inﬂuence on,
445n5, 447n13; on the in-being, 225;
on moods, 23-24, 379; on transcen-
dence, 21-22, 157
Heredity: in developmental systems
theory, 202; distinguished from in-
heritance, 176; and reproduction,
169-170
Hering, E., 281
Heritable variation in ﬁtness, 170-171
Hermeneutics, 444n9
Heteronomous vs. autonomous sys-
tems, 37, 43
Heteronomy, 43, 50, 52-54
Heterophenomenology, 303-311
Heteropoiesis, 98
Higher-order thought theory of con-
sciousness, 468n15
Holism, relational, and emergence,
427-431
Index
533

Homeotic genes, 198-200
Homologous development, 196-199
Homologues, 195-196
Horizon in generative phenomenology,
35-36
Hox genes, 199-200
Human order, 76
Hume, D., 31-32, 460n23
Humphrey, N., 255-256
Hurley, S. L., 253-257, 447n10, 463n2
Husserl, E.: on absolute consciousness,
324-326; on affection, 374; on affec-
tive force, 377-378; on affective re-
lief, 476n8; on association, 31-32; on
attention, 263; and cognitive science,
413-416; on the concrete ego, 381;
on consciousness and attention,
465n9; on drive-intentionality, 364;
on empathy, 477n6; on experience,
83; on habit, 32-33; "I can," 249; on
intersubjectivity, 383-386; on Körper
and Leib, 462n5; on the life-world,
34-35; on memory, 290; on passive
synthesis, 373-374; on perception,
392; on phenomenology, 14; on qual-
itative discontinuity, 85; on recep-
tivity and affectivity, 30; on static phe-
nomenology, 28; on the structures of
consciousness, 356; on temporality,
323, 326-327; on time-consciousness,
318-322, 472n1
Husserlian phenomenology: applied to
the zombie argument, 231-232;
opinions of, 444n10; overview of, 17-
22; and self-othering, 251; termi-
nology in, 462n5
Hutchins, E., 7, 8
Hylozoism, 139-140, 211
"I can" vs. "I think," 249, 313-314
Idealism, metaphysical, 82
Identity: in autonomous systems, 60;
and pattern of life, 146-148; and
sense-making, 152-154
Image. See mental images
Imagery debate: and experience, 269-
280; ignores current mind science,
267; overview of, 269-270; review of,
297-303
Imaginary transposition, 393, 395-398
Imagination, 387-388, 395-398
Imagining, 292-295, 471n26
Immanent objectivity, 26-27
Immanent purposiveness, 146-147,
153, 162
Immanent teleology, 152-153, 453n8
Impredicativities, 142
In-being, 225
Individuality: in autopoietic systems, 
75; as a characterization of life, 96-
97; in minimal autopoietic models,
118; and the "necessary" claim, 123-
124
Ineffability, 258-259
I-ness, 251
Information: deﬁned, 57; in develop-
mental systems theory, 191; and
meaning, 51-60; in molecular bi-
ology, 180-181
Informational dualism, 186-187,
458n10
Information processing, 54-57
Inheritance: deﬁned, 170; in develop-
mental systems theory, 191-193; dis-
tinguished from heredity, 176
Inheritance doctrine, 176-178
In-itself, 86
Input/output distinction in au-
tonomous systems, 365
Intentional arc, 247-248, 366-370
Intentionality: and emotions, 364; in
heterophenomenology, 305-306;
Husserl's view of, 415, 478n3; of an
image, 470n25; in imagination,
471n26; motor, 313-314; and open
intersubjectivity, 383-386; operative,
30; overview of, 22-27; and passive
synthesis, 30; under phenomenology,
15; saturated, 30; source of, 159-
160
Intentional objects, 303-304
Intention compared with protention,
475n1
Interdependency, 103
Interiority, 78-81, 163, 225
Intermodal comparative (explanatory)
gap, 253
Interoception, 368
534
Index

Intersubjective interaction, 243
Intersubjectivity: in generative phe-
nomenology, 33, 36; open, and inten-
tionality, 383-386; overview of, 382.
See also subjectivity
Intramodal comparative (explanatory)
gap, 253
Intransitive consciousness, 468n15
Intrinsic purposiveness: compared with
extrinsic purposiveness, 145-146; de-
ﬁned, 133; qualities of, 453n7
Introspective reporting, 310-311,
472n31
Ipseity and alterity, 251
Isomorphism: analytical, 272, 305; con-
tent and format of, 358; in dynamic
systems theory, 83-86; in Varela's hy-
potheses, 357
"I think" vs. "I can," 249, 313-314
Jack, A. I., 310-311
Jackendoff, R., 6-7
James, W., 4; on association, 31-32; on
feeling, 235; on habit, 32; presaging
Hebb's rule, 447n12; on the present,
318; on temporal ﬂow, 325
Jasper, H., 63
Johnson, M., 402
Joint attention, 397-400, 405-408, 409-
410
Jonas, H.: on experience, 456n17; on
freedom, 152; on knowledge of life,
163; on needful freedom, 150-152;
on a philosophy of life, 128-129; on
the purpose of life, 362; on self-
awareness, 161-162; on selfhood,
149; on self-transcendence of the or-
ganism, 154-157
Juarrero, A.: on autopoietic and auto-
catalytic systems, 479n2; on con-
straints, 425; on Kantian organiza-
tion, 136
Kant, I.: Kim's view of, 481n9; modern
reconsideration of, 138-140; on or-
ganic nature, 129-140; on purposive-
ness, 133-137; on self-organization,
210-211
Kauffman, S. A., 104-105, 215-216
Kellert, S. H., 429
Kelso, J. A. S.: on behavior, 71; ﬁnger
coordination study, 41-42, 57-58; on
intention, 475n1; on multistable
ﬁgure perception, 352; on self-
organization, 60
Kim, J.: on complex systems, 480n7; on
emergence and downward causation,
431-441; emergent downward causa-
tion refuted, 434, 436-438; on
Kantian self-organization, 481n9; on
the zombie argument, 233-234
Kind, A., 468n11
Kinesthesis, 28, 232
Kirschner, M., 196-198, 201
Kitcher, P., 457n8
Köhler, W., 357-358
Körper distinguished from Leib, 231,
233, 235-237
Kosslyn, S. M.: on depictive representa-
tion, 466n1; map scanning experi-
ments, 300; on pictorialism, 270-277;
on visualization and sensorimotor ex-
perience, 295-296
Kriegel, U., 467n8, 468n14
Kronz, F. M.: on the British emergen-
tists, 480n8; on chaos, 429; on dy-
namic emergence, 431
Kuhn, T., 444n1
Ladd, G. T., 4
Language acquisition, 406-408
Language of thought, 52
Large-scale integration problem: de-
scribed, 330; effect of protention 
on, 362; three hypotheses of, 331-
334
Laying down a path in walking, 180,
217-218
Lebenswelt. See life-world
LeDoux, J., 364-365, 476n4
Leeuwenhoek, A. van, 93
Legrand, D., 252, 464n3
Leib. See lived body
Letelier, J. C., 143, 451n6
Le Van Quyen, M., 63-64, 423
Levins, R., 150
Lewis, M. D., 371-373, 378-381
Lewontin, R., 150, 202-203
Index
535

Life: of animals, 94, 221; characterized,
95-97, 104; compared with con-
sciousness, 222-225; criteria of, 103-
104, 116; deﬁned by mode of nour-
ishment, 221; equals cognition,
453n8; as historical phenomenon,
166-167; interior and exterior na-
tures of, 78; knowledge of, 162-165;
Merleau-Ponty's view of, 77-78; mul-
ticellular, 105-107; as a planetary
phenomenon, 119; as sense-making,
157-159; single-cellular, 97-105
Life, organization of, 97-107. See also
autopoiesis
Life and mind, theses of, 128-129
Life cycle, 188
Life-world: in generative phenome-
nology, 34-36; in genetic phenome-
nology, 29; Husserl's view of, 416,
479n4 (App. A)
Limbic system, 365-369, 476n4
Linearity, 68. See also entries at nonlinear
Lipps, T., 389
Lived body: distinguished from Körper,
231, 233, 235-237; experiencing it-
self, 248-251; and intentionality,
478n3; in phenomenology, 16, 21,
28-29; in the zombie argument, 
231
Living orders, 72-76
Living organisms, 47-51, 94
Living present, 326
Living vs. physical structure, 73-75
Local-to-global emergence, 61-63
Locke, J., 31-32
Lovelock, J. E., 95, 119-122
Luisi, P. L., 113-116, 125-126
Lutz, A., 342-346
Mach, E., 280-282, 287-288, 291-292
Machado, A., 13
Machines: deﬁned, 100; and organisms,
141-144; Varela's use of the word,
453n5
Macroscale of emotion, 371-372, 380-
381
Magnetoencephalography (MEG),
346-347
Maine de Biran, M.-F.-P., 229-230
Map scanning experiments, 300
Marbach, E., 469n20
Marcel, G., 246-247
Margulis, L.: on cellular consciousness,
161; on criteria for life, 116; on the
Gaia theory, 95, 119-122
Marín, G., 143, 451n6
Martin, M. G. F., 292-293, 469n21
Matching content doctrine, 349-350
Matter, constancy of, 150-151
Matthews, G. B., 228
Maturana, H. R.: on autopoiesis, 92; on
autopoiesis and cognition, 124; on
autopoietic organization of a single
cell, 97-101; on autopoietic organiza-
tion of metacellulars, 105-107;
deﬁning "autopoietic system," 451n2;
on the enactive approach, 444n9; on
living systems, 141; on minimal au-
topoiesis criteria, 110; on minimal
life, 107; on the "necessary and sufﬁ-
cient" claim, 122-127; on the
nervous system, 422-423; on norms,
147; on purpose, 144-145; on self-
sustenance, 108-110
McGeever, J., 428
McMullin, B.: on autopoietic organiza-
tion, 101; on chain-based bond inhi-
bition, 109-110, 451n6; on minimal
life, 107
Meaning and information, 51-60
Meaning-construction, 54-57, 71
Meaning in living organisms, 74
Mechanical principle, 129-140
Mechanical relations, 68
Mechanical vs. dialectical thinking, 68
Mechanisms: and autopoietic systems,
144; compared with machines, 142;
in Kant, 136-137
MEG (magnetoencephalography),
346-347
Memory: role in empathy, 387-388; in
time-consciousness, 320; of visual ex-
periences, 289-291
Mental acts, intentionality of, 24
Mental agency and moral perception,
401
Mental images: deﬁned in pictorialism,
272; phenomenal vs. functional, 274;
536
Index

research topics, 301-302; spontaneity
of, 468n12
Mental representation, 25
Mental rotation task, 299-300
Mereological supervenience, 479n5
Merleau-Ponty, M.: on attention, 264;
on autonomy in living organisms,
47-48; on behavior, 66-72; on bodily
self-consciousness, 250-251, 464n5;
on bodily subjectivity, 245-251; on
body-as-subject, 250; on the brain
and behavior, 83-84; on empathy,
477n6; on ﬁgure and ground, 84;
football example, 80-81; on form,
66-67, 78; on habit-body, 32-33;
Husserl's inﬂuence on, 85, 445n5,
478n3; on the "insider" perspective,
81; on living orders, 73; on motor in-
tentionality, 313-314; on the motor
loop, 367-368; on objectivism, 86,
165; on otherness, 465n8; on percep-
tion, 76-77; on perceptual synthesis,
317-318; on phenomenology, 14; on
physical orders, 72; on self and the
world, 247; on sense-making, 147; on
transcendental phenomenology, 21-
22; on von Uexküll, 455n12
Mesoscale of emotion, 371-372, 378-
380
Meta-awareness: as a component of re-
ﬂection, 464n4; and the epoché, 19;
and mindfulness, 445n2
Metabolism, continuance in space and
time, 151-156
Metabolism-Repair (M, R) systems, 143
Metacellulars, autopoiesis in, 105-107
Metaphysical idealism, 82
Metastability, 40
Metzinger, T., 474n10
Metzler, J., 299-300
Micelles, 113-116, 125-126
Micro-analytic interview, 476n6
Microscale of emotion, 371-378
Mikulecky, D. C., 452n8
Mind, 7, 78
Mind-body problem of cognition, 6-7
Mindfulness and meta-awareness,
445n2
Mind-mind problem of cognition, 6-7
Minimal autopoiesis: abstract model of,
110-112; chemical models of, 113-
116; computational models of, 107-
110; criteria for, 108-110, 116-118
Minimal cell, 98, 113
Minimal sufﬁciency, 474n13
Mirror neurons, 394
Mirror systems studies, 394-395
Modern Synthesis of classical Dar-
winism, 171, 194
Mohanty, J. N., 445n3
Monera kingdom, 94
Monod, J., 144
Moods, 23-24, 371-372, 378-380
Mooney ﬁgures study, 334-335, Plate VI
Moore, C., 397
Moore, G. E., 467n7
Moral perception, 393, 401-402
Moreno, A., 46, 64, 79
Morowitz, H. J.: on adaptation and
cognition, 455n13; on ecological
context of autopoiesis, 118; on the
evolution of life, 116-117; on the Ur-
cell, 94
Morphodynamics: and emergence, 420;
isomorphism in, 86; and the nature
of behavior, 71; and phenomenal
form, 84-85
Morphogenesis, 84-85
Morphogenetic ﬁeld, 460n20
Morphospace, 461n24
Morris, S. C., 217, 460n22
Moss, L., 179
Motor embodiment, 376-377
Motor intentionality, 247, 313-314
Motor loop of the intentional arc, 367-
368
Mpodozis, J., 143, 451n6
(M, R) systems, 143
Multicellularity, 105-107, 197-198
Mutual self and other understanding,
393, 398-401
Myin, E., 257-265
Nagel, T.: on bodily experience, 235;
on the body-body problem, 462n4;
on the hard problem of conscious-
ness, 222; on the subjective character
of experience, 283; on zombies, 230
Index
537

Natural artifacts, 210
Natural attitude, 17-18
Naturalism: biological, 237-242; and
the "insider" perspective, 81; in neu-
rophenomenology, 356-359; and
the phenomenological attitude, 81-
87
Natural purpose: autopoietic systems
as, 138; Kant's view of, 133-140; of an
organism, 153, 211; overview of, 140-
141. See also purpose
Natural science, Kantian principles of,
131-138
Natural selection: in developmental sys-
tems theory, 191-192, 202; diverse
views of, 209; in enactive evolution,
207-208; enactive view of, 212-213;
Kantian analysis of, 130-131; and
purposiveness, 453n6; requirements
for, 170-171, 457n4; role of au-
topoiesis in, 214; and self-
organization, 208-218
Nature, 34, 78-79
Nature-nurture, 191, 403-405
Nature vs. culture, 193, 403-405,
458n14
NCC (neural correlates of conscious-
ness), 349-356
"Necessary and sufﬁcient" claim, 148-
149
"Necessary" claim, 122-124
Needful freedom, 149-152. See also
freedom
Nervous system, 13, 49-51
Neural correlates of consciousness
(NCCs), 349-356
Neural correspondence, 473n3
Neural network, 9
Neurodynamical model of the inten-
tional arc, 366-370
Neurodynamics, emergence in, 62-64
Neurophenomenology: described, 15,
312; informing biology, 358; of
mental imagery, 302; and naturalism,
356-359; and the neural correlates of
consciousness, 349-356; and time-
consciousness, 329-338; "triple-
braided," 357; Varela's view of, 87;
working hypothesis of, 329
Neurophenomenology, experimental:
overview of, 338-341; perception ex-
periment, 341-346; temporality ex-
periment, 346-349
Neuroreductionism, 243
Neutralization, 292-295, 469n19
New Synthesis, 195
Noë, A.: on the absolute gap, 257-265;
on consciousness and attention, 263;
on the explanatory gap, 253-257;
sensorimotor contingency theory,
254
Noema, noesis, 25, 29, 446n9
Nonlinear differential equations, 40
Nonlinear emergence, 138-139, 419-
423
Nonlinearity in dialectical thinking, 68
Nonlinear terms, 39
Norms in living organisms, 74
Nurture. See nature-nurture
Object-directedness, 22-23, 30, 446n9
Objectivity, objectivism: distinguished
from transcendental phenome-
nology, 164-165; of experience, 318;
Merleau-Ponty's view of, 86; of na-
ture, 34; subject-object structure of,
29-30, 446n7
Omnis cellula e cellula, 93
Ongoingness, 258-259
Ontological emergence, 479n5, 480n6
Operational closure, 45, 60, 106
Operative intentionality, 30, 478n3
Opitz, J. M., 194
Order parameter, 61
O'Regan, J. K.: on the absolute gap,
257-265; on consciousness and at-
tention, 263; sensorimotor contin-
gency theory, 254; on subjectivity,
261-262
Organisms: distinguished from arti-
facts, 133, 460n23; and environment,
204-205; and machines, 141-144;
and the milieu, 70; as natural arti-
facts, 210; as purposes, 132-133; self-
transcendence of, 154-157
Organization: of the brain, 365-366; of
cells, 97-105; compared with struc-
ture, 97; of core consciousness, 354-
538
Index

355; Kantian, 136; of multicell organ-
isms, 105-107; of sentience, 354-355;
of single-cell organisms, 97-105. See
also autopoiesis; autopoietic orga-
nization
Organizational characterization of life,
97
Organizational closure: deﬁned, 45,
448n6; Goguen's view of, 449n12; in
Rosen's theory, 143; Varela's view of,
449n12
Original intentionality, 453n8
The other and intentionality, 22
Oyama, S.: on autopoiesis, 458n15; on
evolution, 188; on the genetic
"code," 184-185; on genocentrism,
201-202; on inheritance, 178; on
neo-Darwinism, 193; response to
genocentrism, 188-190
Pacherie, E., 295
Pain and object-directedness, 23
Paley, W.: on the Argument from De-
sign, 460n23; on divine artifacts, 133;
mechanical perspective, 211
Panisset, M., 119
Parity thesis, 191
Passive bodily coupling, 392-395
Passive genesis, 29-30, 32-33
Passive synthesis, 29-30, 373
Passivist-cognitivist view of the brain,
366
Passivity, 263-264, 373-374
Patocka, J.: on e-motion, 364, 378; on
feeling of existence, 229-230; on
mood, 380
Pattee, H. H., 54-56
Pattern dynamics, 58
Penﬁeld, W., 62-63
Perceived situation-work, 76-78
Perception: and empathy, 386-387;
Husserl's view of, 232; moral, 393; si-
multaneous, by others, 384-385,
477n3
Perception experiment, 341-346
Perceptual completion, 275-276
Perceptual synthesis, 317-318
Peripheral vision, 280-282
Personality, 371-372, 380-381
Personal vs. subpersonal, 6, 447n10
Perturbation/response distinction in
autonomous systems, 365
Petitot, J., 72-73
Phantom limbs: and dominance vs. def-
erence, 255; Merleau-Ponty's view of,
32-33; Ramachandran's view of, 253
Phase synchrony, 332-333
Phenomenological analysis, 267-269
Phenomenological attitude, 18-21, 81-
87
Phenomenological psychology, 20
Phenomenological reduction, 17-22
Phenomenology, 14-15, 474n11
Pheno-physics, 85
Phenotypic traits, 192-193, 202
Phenotypic variation, 170
Philosophy distinguished from cogni-
tive science, 3-4
Philosophy of life, 128-129
Phylogeny, 191-192
Phylotypic body plan, 197-201
Physical orders, 72-76
Physical realization principle, 435
Physical-symbol-system model, 8
Physical vs. living structure, 73-75
Physicochemical phenomena, 454n10
Physics of phenomenality, 72-73
Piaget, J., 401
Pictorialism compared with descrip-
tionalism, 270-275
Picture-viewing, 287-289
Plants, 94, 221
Poincaré, H., 40
Pomerantz, J. R., 271
Preafference and expectancy, 369
Precipitating event, 376
Preformation, 175-176
Pregiven, 30, 35-36. See also given
Prereﬂective experience, 250-251, 261
Prereﬂective self-awareness, 322-328
Prereﬂective self-consciousness, 464n3
Prereﬂective vs. reﬂective awareness,
315
The present, 318-319
Presentation: and re-presentation, 25-
26, 288, 320; in time-consciousness,
320
Presistence, 460n21
Index
539

Primal consciousness, organization of,
354-355
Primal impression, 319-322
Process distinguished from property,
418-419
Production reaction in a tesselation au-
tomaton, 108
Property distinguished from process,
418-419
Proprioception distinguished from pre-
reﬂective self-consciousness, 464n3
Proprioceptive loop of the intentional
arc, 367-368
Protein synthesis, 168, 456n2
Protention: compared with intention,
475n1; overview of, 360-362; in time-
consciousness, 319-322
Protocells, 94
Protoctist kingdom, 94
Psychology, 3-4
Purpose, 129-133, 141. See also natural
purpose
Purposiveness: immanent, 146-147,
153, 162; intrinsic, 133, 145-146,
453n7; Kant's view of, 133-137; and
natural selection, 453n6; relative,
133, 145-146
Pylyshyn, Z. W., 270-273, 299, 471n27
Qualitative differential equations, 40
Qualitative discontinuity, 85
Quantum theory, 130, 480n6
Raff, R. A., 194
Ramachandran, V. S., 253
Rayleigh-Bénard convection rolls, 433
Reactant criterion of autopoietic orga-
nization, 101
Reaction network: in autopoietic orga-
nization of metacellulars, 106-107; as
a criterion of autopoietic organiza-
tion, 103, 126; in the Gaia theory,
121; in social systems, 451n3
Readiness in the perception experi-
ment, 343-344, Plates VII-VIII
Reafference loop of the intentional arc,
367-369
Received view of evolution, 170-173
Receptivity, 263-264, 373-374
Reciprocal constraints, 340
Recursive function, 448n6
Reductionism: distinguished from
emergentism, 417; epistemological
and ontological compared, 417; in
genocentricism, 185; Kim's view, 438;
Kim's view refuted, 440-441
Reﬂection, components of, 464n4
Reﬂective vs. prereﬂective awareness,
315
Reﬂexive downward causation, 431-433
Reﬂexive sympathy, 389
Reﬂex theory, 450n2
Regulative concepts, 137
Regulatory genes, 458n16
Reiterated empathy, 392, 399
Relational holism, 427-431, 479n3
Relative purposiveness, 133, 145-146
Relativity theory, 130
Relaxation time, 333-334
Remembering. See memory
Replication, 168-169, 173
Replicative molecules, 123, 213-214
Replicator, 178-179, 192
Representation, 25-26, 58-59, 288
Re-presentation: in memory, 289-291;
and presentation, 25-26, 288; in
time-consciousness, 320
Representationalism: described, 282-
283; externalist, 467n9; and Husserl,
413-416, 478n2; and the noema,
446n9
Reproduction, 92, 167-170
Retention, 319-322
Reverse engineering, 210, 460n22
Risk minimization, 460n21
Robustness, 194-201
Rodriguez, E., 473n7
Roepstorff, A., 310-311
Rosch, E., 13-14
Rosen, R.: distinguishing organisms
and machines, 141-144; on the Gaia
hypothesis, 452n8; on the physical,
238-239
Ruiz-Mirazo, K., 46, 64
Sagan, D., 116, 161
Saint-Hilaire, E. G., 200
Salience, affective, 376
540
Index

Sarkar, S., 180, 181
Sartre, J.-P.: on belief, 470n24; on body-
as-subject, 250; on ego in conscious-
ness, 447n11; on ﬁction, 469n22,
470n23; on imaging consciousness,
471n28; on intentionality, 470n25,
471n26; on mental imagery, 300-301;
on pain, 23; on spontaneity of mental
imagery, 468n12; on visualizing, 293-
295; on visual perception, 285, 286
Satisﬁcing, 207
Saturated intentionality, 30
Searle, J. R.: on biological naturalism,
237-241; on consciousness, 463n9;
on downward causation, 426; on
models of consciousness, 350-354;
on presentations, 469n18
Second-order autopoietic systems, 105-
107
Segment polarity genes, 198
Segregation doctrine, 175-176
Selector genes, 197-200, 459n17
Self, selfhood: in autonomous systems,
48-49; in autopoietic systems, 75;
and body, 245; deﬁned, 448n7; in the
dynamic sensorimotor approach,
260; and needful freedom, 149-152;
and the other, 393, 398-401
Self-awareness: Jonas's view of, 161-
162; Kriegel's view of, 468n14; prere-
ﬂective, 322-328; in skillful coping,
315-317; Zahavi's view of, 327-328
Self-consciousness. See bodily self-
consciousness
Selﬁsh-gene theory, 160
Self-maintenance, 108, 124
Self-organization: Barandiaran's view
of, 79; and emergence, 64, 336-337;
in emergent processes, 61-62; of
emotions, 370-381; and intrinsic pur-
posiveness, 145-146; Kantian, 210-
211; in Kantian natural purpose,
134-137; Kelso's view of, 60; Kim on
Kantian, 481n9; Moreno's view of,
64, 79; and natural purpose, 140-
141; and natural selection, 208-218;
in time-consciousness, 335-336
Self-production: compared with repro-
duction, 92, 167-168; in the Gaia
theory, 120; in Kantian natural pur-
pose, 134-137
Self-regulation, 243
Self-sustenance, 108-110
Self-transcendence, 154-157
Sellars, W., 444n1
Sense-experience, 227-228
Sense-making: and identity, 152-154;
living as, 157-159; and original inten-
tionality, 453n8; and pattern of life,
146-148
Sensing-in, 389-390
Sensorimotor contingency theory, 254
Sensorimotor coupling, 243-244, 393-
395
Sensorimotor experience, 295-296
Sensual empathy, 389-390
Sentience, 161-162, 354-355
Le sentiment de l'existence, 229-230
Sheets-Johnstone, M., 161-162
Shepard, R., 299-300
Silberstein, M., 428-429
Simon, H., 207
Situation and response, 70-71
Skillful coping, 313-316
Smith, B., 281
Smith, B. C., 443n2, 447n14
Smith, M., 55
Sober, E., 461n24
Social systems, autopoiesis in, 451n3
Somatic embryogenesis, 175-176
Somatic line, 174-175
Sonea, S., 119
Soul, the, 226, 228
Spacetime loop of the intentional arc,
367-369
Spatial differentiation, 197-198
Sperry, R., 433-434
Spinoza, B. de, 155, 162
Spontaneous formation, 108, 451n5
Standard environment and genetic
"code," 457n8
State space of dynamic systems, 42
Static analysis, 28
Static phenomenology: analysis of the
imagery debate, 297-303; compared
with genetic phenomenology, 28-29;
deﬁned, 268; overview of, 16-17;
speciﬁed, 471n30
Index
541

Stawarska, B., 469n22
Steady-state inheritance system, 176
Stearns, S. C.: on constraints, 461n25;
on regulatory genes, 458n16; on risk
minimization, 460n21
Stein, E., 386-393
Sterelny, K.: on life cycle, 188; on repli-
cates, 192; on standard environment,
457n8
Stern, D. N., 476n6
Stewart, J.: on 3D tesselation automaton,
110-112; on autopoiesis and cogni-
tion, 125-126; in light of Rosen, 144
Stimulus and reaction, 70-71
Strong continuity thesis of life and
mind, 128-129
Structural coupling, 45-46, 206-207
Structural inheritance system, 177
Structuralism, 461n24
Structure, 67, 97. See also form
Subjective character of experience,
283, 467n8
Subjectivity: and bodily self-
consciousness, 244-252; in the body-
body problem, 261-262; under cog-
nitivism, 5-7; under connectionism,
10; deﬁned, 258-259; under em-
bodied dynamicism, 12; as intersub-
jectivity, 409; and life-world, 34; and
phenomenology, 87, 268; in tran-
scendental phenomenology, 22. See
also intersubjectivity
Subject-object structure, 29-30, 446n7
Subpersonal routines: in cognitive sys-
tems, 472n31; deﬁned, 6; in imagery
tasks, 270-275
Subpersonal vs. personal perspective, 6,
447n10
"Sufﬁcient" claim of autopoiesis, 124-127
Superorganism, 119-122
Supervenience, mereological, 479n5
Surfactants, 113-116
Symbiosis and inheritance, 177
Symbolic behavior, 449n2
Symbolism in the human order, 76
Sympathy, reﬂexive, 389
Synchrony: deﬁned, 473n4; in down-
ward causation, 431-433; in emo-
tional self-organization, 374-375;
generalized, 473n6; in the large-scale
integration problem, 332-335, 337-
338; in the perception experiment,
345-346, Plates VII-VIII; in the uni-
ﬁed ﬁeld model, 354
Syncretive behavior, 449n2
Synthesis. See Modern Synthesis of clas-
sical Darwinism; New Synthesis
Systems, 39, 453n5
Tactile-vision substitution systems
(TVSS), 255
Tailored-helping behavior, 396
Teleology: antinomy of teleological
judgment, 131-132; and autopoiesis,
144-149; of intentionality, 24; in
Kant, 129-140; traditional compo-
nents of, 130; Varela's view of, 453n8
Temporality: experiment, 346-349; in-
tentional structure of, 475n15; in
unity vs. object, 472n2
Terminus genes, 198
Tesselation automaton: 3D models of,
110-112, 125-126; cellular, 456n16;
as a model of minimal autopoiesis,
107-110; "necessary and sufﬁcient"
claim of, 126; spontaneous formation
of, 451n5
Third-person methods, 248, 303-311
Thom, R., 72
Thomas, L., 121
Thompson, E., 13-14
Tiehen, J. T., 431, 480n8
Time, 15, 39-40, 42-43
Time-consciousness: and dynamic sys-
tems approach, 312; in genetic phe-
nomenology, 28; and neurophenom-
enology, 329-338; and prereﬂective
self-awareness, 322-328; and the
present, 318-319; structure of, 319-
322
Time scales, 371-373
Token-token neural correspondence,
473n3
Tomasello, M.: on cultural evolution,
410-411; on joint attention, 397-400,
405-408; on language acquisition,
406-410; on moral perception, 401
Top-down autonomy, 44-46
Transcendence-within-immanence, 26-
27
542
Index

Transcendency, 129
Transcendental consciousness, 86-87
Transcendental phenomenology:
Bitbol's view of, 82-83; and knowl-
edge of life, 164; Merleau-Ponty's
view of, 81; overview of, 20-22
Transcription in cellular reproduction,
181-182
Transitive consciousness, 264-265,
468n15
Translation in cellular reproduction,
181-182
Transparency, 282-287, 468n11
Turing, A. M., 7-8
Turing machine, 7-8, 143
TVSS (tactile-vision substitution sys-
tems), 255
Two-dimensional cellular automaton.
See tesselation automaton
Type-type neural correspondence, 473n3
Ultra-Darwinists, 211
Umwelt, 59, 74, 153
Uniﬁed ﬁeld model of consciousness,
351-354, 475n14
Unity of life, 92
Universal ancestor. See common ancestor
Ur-cells, 94, 117
Uribe, R., 107-110
Use-objects, 76-78
Van Gelder, T., 42
Varela, F. J.: on affect, 375-376, 378; on
autopoiesis, 92, 101; on autopoiesis
and cognition, 124; on autopoietic
organization of a single cell, 97-101;
on autopoietic organization of meta-
cellulars, 105-107; on chain-based
bond inhibition, 451n6; on closure,
448n4; Closure Thesis, 48-49; on de-
scribing complex systems, 56-57; on
emergence, 336-337; on the enactive
approach, 13-14, 444n9; on experi-
encing music, 476n7; on feedback
loops, 449n8; on generative passages,
475n16; on global-to-local emer-
gence in epilepsy, 63-64; on Husser-
lian phenomenology, 444n10; on
identity and sense-making, 146-148;
immanent teleology, 453n8; on iso-
morphism, 86; on living as sense-
making, 157-159; on living systems,
141; on machines and systems,
453n5; on minimal autopoiesis cri-
teria, 110; on minimal life, 107; 
on naturalism, 357; "necessary and
sufﬁcient" claim, 122-127; on the
nervous system, 422-423; on neural
correspondence, 473n3; on organism
and environment, 154; on organiza-
tional closure, 449n12; on original
intentionality, 453n8; on protention,
362; on purpose, 144-145; on self-
sustenance, 108-110; on switches in
synchrony, 374-375; on time-
consciousness, 329-338; on top-down
autonomy, 44-46
Verhalten, 450n3
Vesicles, 113-117, 125-126
Virchow, R., 92-94
Virtual conditions of living organisms,
74
Viruses, 104, 123
Visceral-interoceptive embodiment,
376-377
Visual ﬁeld, 280-282, 287-288, 291-292
Visualizing, 291-297
Visual perception research critiqued,
275-280
Vitalism, 130, 224
Vital orders. See living orders
Von Uexküll, J., 59
Wagner, G., 212-213
Walking, laying down a path in, 180,
217-218
Wallace, A. R., 170
Watt, D. F., 362-363
Weber, A., 146-148, 453n8
Weber, B. H., 131, 208-209, 214-215
Weismann, A. F. L., 174
Weismann Doctrine, 174-179
Welton, D., 24
Wexler, M., 295-296
Wittgenstein, L. J. J., 466n6
Work, 77
Wright, S., 172
Zahavi, D., 30, 327-328
Zombies, 230-235
Index
543

